INFORMATION AGE 


AND 


t THE GREAT RECKONING 


ALSO BY JAMES DALE DAVIDSON AND LORD WILLIAM REES-MOGG 


Blood in the Streets: Investment Profits in a World Gone Mad 
The Great Reckoning: Protect Yourself in the Coming Depression 


THE 
GUV EREIGN 


INDIVINUAL 


Mastering the Transition to the 
Information Age 


JAMES DALE DAVIDSON and 
LORD WILLIAM REES-MOGG 


A Touchstone Book 
Published by Simon & Schuster 


Z7IN 

TOUCHSTONE 

Rockefeller Center 

1230 Avenue of the Americas 
New York, NY 10020 


Copyright © 1997 by James Dale Davidson and Lord William Rees-Mogg 
All rights reserved, 

including the right of reproduction 

in whole or in part in any form. 


First Touchstone Edition 1999 


TOUCHSTONE and colophon are registered trademarks 
of Simon & Schuster Inc. 


Designed by Irving Perkins Associates, Inc. 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
lO 9 8° 7-6 5 43° 2 1 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Davidson, James Dale. 

The sovereign individual : how to survive and thrive during the 
collapse of the welfare state / James Dale Davidson and Lord William 
Rees-Mogg. 

p: ‘Cin 

Includes index. 

1. Economic forecasting. 2. Twenty-first century—Forecasts. 

3. Computers and civilization. 4. Information society. 5. World 


politics—1989— —Forecasting. I. Rees-Mogg, William, date. 
Ll Title. 
HC59.15.D385 1997 
338.9—dc21 96-48244 
CIE 


ISBN 0-684-8 1007-7 
0-684-83272-0 (Pbk) 


ALHNUWLEUGMEN Ta 


When the definitive “History of the Thank-You Note Through the Ages” is 
compiled, this whole book could well be an exhibit. It is the third we 
have done together on various aspects of the great transformation to the 
Information Age now under way. The Sovereign Individual builds upon 
research and analysis that went into Blood in the Streets and The Great 
Reckoning. Like those books, it appropriates the thoughts of many authori- 
ties whose work is credited in the texts and citations. It also builds upon 
insights gained in conversations, both recently and over the past decade. In 
that sense, we should probably repeat all of our acknowledgments to the 
friends and accomplices who helped us in crucial ways in our two previous 
books. For the record, we do. Those whom we have mentioned and over- 
looked in our previous books, please take note. You have our thanks, cubed, 
for a decade of stimulation and kindnesses. Our special thanks go to Bill 
Bonner, who has helped us stay abreast of the changing currents of publish- 
ing during the past decade. It is mainly his genius that accounts for the huge 
worldwide circulation of our newsletter, Strategic Investment. He has helped 
us formulate ongoing market tests of our ideas. But more to the point, he 
has been an indispensable friend and sounding board. 

We also acknowledge the special friendship of Alan Lindsay; Brian, Don- 
ald, and Scott Lines; Robert Lloyd George; Jane Collis; Carter Beese; Andy 
Miller; Scott Hill; Nils Taube; Gilbert de Botton; Michael Geltner; Mark 
Ford; David Keating; Pete Sepp; Curtin Winsor, III; V. Harwood Bocker, III; 
Guillermo Cervino; Eduardo Maschwitz; Michael Reynal; Jorge Gamarci; 
Jackie Locke; Douglas Reid; Jose Pascar; Luis Kenny; Robert Lawrence, 
III]; Ken Klein; Kim Saull; Jim Moloney; Mike Geltner; Lee Euler; Tom 
Crema; Nancy Lazar; Greg Barnhill; Becky Mangus; Nancy Oppenlander; 
Wayne Livingstone; Hans Kuppers; Michael Baybak; Allan Zschlag; David 
Hale; Lisa Eden; Mel Lieberman; Glenn Blaugh; Sir Roger Douglas; Mi- 
chael Smorch; Jimmie Rogers; Ambrose Evans-Pritchard; Chris Wood; Marc 


6 Acknowledgments 


Faber; Ronnie Chan; William F. Nicklin; Lenny Smith; Jack Wheeler; Jim 
Bennett; Gordon Tullock; Jay Bernstein; Gary Vernier; Jenny Mitchel; Julia 
Guth; Lisa Young; Mia; Mark Frasier; Lisa Bernard; Rita Smith; Ruth Lyons; 
Yarah Chiekh; Fabian Dilaimy; Tim Hoese; and our families. 

As before, we apologize to those whom we have overlooked. We are sorry 
that the acknowledgment we owe them has fallen between the cracks, like 
an unpaid bill that got tangled up with the grocery circulars and tossed away. 
Perhaps we can avoid the wrath of the collection agency by posting a bond 
of thanks to all our unmentioned friends. We depend on you even more than 
we realize. 

Finally, we thank those who were specifically involved in launching this 
project: our agent, Theron Raines; our editor, Dominick Anfuso; and the 
other good people at Simon & Schuster, including Carolyn Reidy, Cassie 
Jones, Ana DeBevoise, and Cherise Grant. 


(hit Myr 
7 re 
A 4 " 
“ i 
yp igh egy ay ame Pe Reed i ey , 
ls in the new millennium ii 
Ht y 
os ea 
4) ie aD); fi 
ey ii 
er ab ne P 
Hi Bi: 
a i} i 
a 
aaguy. 
Or 
ee Pt 


4 ey ay 

, ) ae 1m 
Ben | it 
y iH a 


if 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2014 


https://archive.org/details/sovereignindividOOjame 


“The future is disorder. A door like this has cracked open five or six times 
since we got up on our hind legs. It is the best possible time to be alive, when 
almost everything you thought you knew is wrong.” 

—Tom Stoppard, Arcadia 


CUNTENTo 


. The Transition of the Year 2000: 


The Fourth Stage of Human Society 


. Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 


. East of Eden: The Agricultural Revolution and the 


Sophistication of Violence 


. The Last Days of Politics: Parallels Between the 


Senile Decline of the Holy Mother Church and 
the Nanny State 


. The Life and Death of the Nation-State: Democracy and 


Nationalism as Resource Strategies in the Age of Violence 


. The Megapolitics of the Information Age: 


The Triumph of Efficiency over Power 


. Transcending Locality: The Emergence of the Cybereconomy 


. The End of Egalitarian Economics: The Revolution in 


Earnings Capacity in a World Without Jobs 


. Nationalism, Reaction, and the New Luddites 
10. 
ie 


The Twilight of Democracy 


Morality and Crime in the “Natural Economy” of 
the Information Age 


AFTERWORD 

APPENDIX: RESOURCES FOR ACHIEVING INDEPENDENCE 
NOTES 

INDEX 


13 
53 


74 


95 


127 


53 
196 


22s 
258 
327 


358 


a9) 
401 
405 
423 


CHAPTER | 


THE TRANSITTON UF 
THE YEAR cull 


The Fourth Stage of Human Society 


“It feels like something big is about to happen: graphs show us the 
yearly growth of populations, atmospheric concentrations of carbon 
dioxide, Net addresses, and Mbytes per dollar. They all soar up to an 
asymptote just beyond the turn of the century: The Singularity. The 
end of everything we know. The beginning of something we may never 
understand.” 


—DANNY HILLIS 


PREMONITIONS 


The coming of the year 2000 has haunted the Western imagination for the 
past thousand years. Ever since the world failed to end at the turn of the first 
millennium after Christ, theologians, evangelists, poets, seers, and now, even 
computer programmers have looked to the end of this decade with an expec- 
tation that it would bring something momentous. No less an authority than 
Isaac Newton speculated that the world would end with the year 2000. 
Michel de Nostradamus, whose prophecies have been read by every genera- 
tion since they were first published in 1568, forecast the coming of the Third 
Antichrist in July 1999.2 Swiss psychologist Carl Jung, connoisseur of the 
“collective unconscious,” envisioned the birth of a New Age in 1997. Such 
forecasts may easily be ridiculed. And so can the sober forecasts of econo- 
mists, such as Dr. Edward Yardeni of Deutsche Bank Securities, who expects 


14 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


computer malfunctions on the millennial midnight to “disrupt the entire 
global economy.” * But whether you view the Y2K computer problem as 
groundless hysteria ginned up by computer programmers and Information 
Technology consultants to stir up business, or as a mysterious instance of 
technology unfolding in concert with the prophetic imagination, there is no 
denying that circumstances at the eve of the millennium excite more than 
the usual morbid doubt about where the world is tending. 

A sense of disquiet about the future has begun to color the optimism so 
characteristic of Western societies for the past 250 years. People everywhere 
are hesitant and worried. You see it in their faces. Hear it in their conversa- 
tion. See it reflected in polls and registered in the ballot box. Just as an 
invisible, physical change of ions in the atmosphere signals that a thunder- 
storm is imminent even before the clouds darken and lightning strikes, so 
now, in the twilight of the millennium, premonitions of change are in the air. 
One person after another, each in his own way, senses that time is running 
out on a dying way of life. As the decade expires, a murderous century 
expires with it, and also a glorious millennium of human accomplishment. 
All draw to a close with the year 2000. 


“For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid that shall 
not be known.” 


—MATTHEW 10:26 


We believe that the modern phase of Western civilization will end with it. 
This book tells why. Like many earlier works, it 1s an attempt to see into a 
glass darkly, to sketch out the vague shapes and dimensions of a future that 
is still to be. In that sense, we mean our work to be apocalyptic—in the 
original meaning of the word. Apokalypsis means “unveiling” in Greek. We 
believe that a new stage in history—the Information Age—is about to be 
“unveiled.” 


“We are watching the beginnings of a new logical space, an instantaneous 
electronic everywhereness, which we may all access, enter into, and experi- 
ence. We have, in short, the beginnings of a new kind of community. The virtual 
community becomes the model for a secular Kingdom of Heaven; as Jesus 
said there were many mansions in his Fathers Kingdom, so there are many 
virtual communities, each reflecting their own needs and desires.” 


— MICHAEL GRASSO* 


The Transition of the Year 2000 15 


THE FOURTH STAGE OF HUMAN SOCIETY 


The theme of this book is the new revolution of power which is liberating 
individuals at the expense of the twentieth-century nation-state. Innovations 
that alter the logic of violence in unprecedented ways are transforming the 
boundaries within which the future must lie. If our deductions are correct, 
you stand at the threshold of the most sweeping revolution in history. Faster 
than all but a few now imagine, microprocessing will subvert and destroy 
the nation-state, creating new forms of social organization in the process. 
This will be far from an easy transformation. 

The challenge it will pose will be all the greater because it will happen 
with incredible speed compared with anything seen in the past. Through all 
of human history from its earliest beginnings until now, there have been only 
three basic stages of economic life: (1) hunting-and-gathering societies; (2) 
agricultural societies; and (3) industrial societies. Now, looming over the 
horizon, is something entirely new, the fourth stage of social organization: 
information societies. 

Each of the previous stages of society has corresponded with distinctly 
different phases in the evolution and control of violence. As we explain in 
detail, information societies promise to dramatically reduce the returns to 
violence, in part because they transcend locality. The virtual reality of cyber- 
space, what novelist William Gibson characterized as a “consensual halluci- 
nation,” will be as far beyond the reach of bullies as imagination can take it. 
In the new millennium, the advantage of controlling violence on a large 
scale will be far lower than it has been at any time since before the French 
Revolution. This will have profound consequences. One of these will be 
rising crime. When the payoff for organizing violence at a large scale tum- 
bles, the payoff from violence at a smaller scale is likely to jump. Violence 
will become more random and localized. Organized crime will grow in 
scope. We explain why. 

Another logical implication of falling returns to violence is the eclipse of 
politics, which is the stage for crime on the largest scale. There 1s much 
evidence that adherence to the civic myths of the twentieth-century nation- 
state is rapidly eroding. The death of Communism is merely the most strik- 
ing example. As we explore in detail, the collapse of morality and growing 
corruption among leaders of Western governments are not random develop- 
ments. They are evidence that the potential of the nation-state 1s exhausted. 
Even many of its leaders no longer believe the platitudes they mouth. Nor 
are they believed by others. 


16 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


History Repeats Itself 


This is a situation with striking parallels in the past. Whenever technological 
change has divorced the old forms from the new moving forces of the 
economy, moral standards shift, and people begin to treat those in command 
of the old institutions with growing disdain. This widespread revulsion often 
comes into evidence well before people develop a new coherent ideology of 
change. So it was in the late fifteenth century, when the medieval Church was 
the predominant institution of feudalism. Notwithstanding popular belief in 
“the sacredness of the sacerdotal office,” both the higher and lower ranks of 
clergy were held in the utmost contempt—not unlike the popular attitude 
toward politicians and bureaucrats today.> 

We believe that much can be learned by analogy between the situation 
at the end of the fifteenth century, when life had become thoroughly satu- 
rated by organized religion, and the situation today, when the world has 
become saturated with politics. The costs of supporting institutionalized 
religion at the end of the fifteenth century had reached a historic extreme, 
much as the costs of supporting government have reached a senile extreme 
today. 

We know what happened to organized religion in the wake of the Gunpow- 
der Revolution. Technological developments created strong incentives to 
downsize religious institutions and lower their costs. A similar technological 
revolution is destined to downsize radically the nation-state early in the new 
millennium. 


“Today, after more than a century of electric technology, we have extended 
our central nervous system itself in a global embrace, abolishing both space 
and time as far as our planet is concerned.’ ® 


—MARSHALL MCLUHAN, 1964 


The Information Revolution 


As the breakdown of large systems accelerates, systematic compulsion will 
recede as a factor shaping economic life and the distribution of income. 
Efficiency will become more important than the dictates of power in the 
organization of social institutions. This means that provinces and even cities 
that can effectively uphold property rights and provide for the administration 
of justice, while consuming few resources, will be viable sovereignties in 
the Information Age, as they generally have not been during the last five 
centuries. An entirely new realm of economic activity that is not hostage to 


The Transition of the Year 2000 17 


physical violence will emerge in cyberspace. The most obvious benefits will 
flow to the “cognitive elite,” who will increasingly operate outside political 
boundaries. They are already equally at home in Frankfurt, London, New 
York, Buenos Aires, Los Angeles, Tokyo, and Hong Kong. Incomes will 
become more unequal within jurisdictions and more equal between them. 

The Sovereign Individual explores the social and financial consequences 
of this revolutionary change. Our desire is to help you to take advantage of 
the opportunities of the new age and avoid being destroyed by its impact. If 
only half of what we expect to see happens, you face change of a magnitude 
with few precedents in history. 

The transformation of the year 2000 will not only revolutionize the char- 
acter of the world economy, it will do so more rapidly than any previous 
phase change. Unlike the Agricultural Revolution, the Information Revolu- 
tion will not take millennia to do its work. Unlike the Industrial Revolution, 
its impact will not be spread over centuries. The Information Revolution will 
happen within a lifetime. 

What is more, it will happen almost everywhere at once. Technical and 
economic innovations will no longer be confined to small portions of the 
globe. The transformation will be all but universal. And it will involve a 
break with the past so profound that it will almost bring to life the magical 
domain of the gods as imagined by the early agricultural peoples like the 
ancient Greeks. To a greater degree than most would now be willing to 
concede, it will prove difficult or impossible to preserve many contemporary 
institutions in the new millennium. When information societies take shape 
they will be as different from industrial societies as the Greece of Aeschylus 
was from the world of the cave dwellers. 


PROMETHEUS UNBOUND: THE RISE OF THE 
SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


“I know of no more encouraging fact than the unquestionable ability of man 
to elevate his life by conscious endeavor.” 


—HENRY DAVID THOREAU 


The coming transformation is both good news and bad. The good news is 
that the Information Revolution will liberate individuals as never before. For 
the first time, those who can educate and motivate themselves will be almost 
entirely free to invent their own work and realize the full benefits of their 


18 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


own productivity. Genius will be unleashed, freed from both the oppression 
of government and the drags of racial and ethnic prejudice. In the Informa- 
tion Society, no one who is truly able will be detained by the ill-formed 
opinions of others. It will not matter what most of the people on earth might 
think of your race, your looks, your age, your sexual proclivities, or the way 
you wear your hair. In the cybereconomy, they will never see you. The ugly, 
the fat, the old, the disabled will vie with the young and beautiful on equal 
terms in utterly color-blind anonymity on the new frontiers of cyberspace. 


Ideas Become Wealth 


Merit, wherever it arises, will be rewarded as never before. In an environ- 
ment where the greatest source of wealth will be the ideas you have in your 
head rather than physical capital alone, anyone who thinks clearly will 
potentially be rich. The Information Age will be the age of upward mobility. 
It will afford far more equal opportunity for the billions of humans in parts 
of the world that never shared fully in the prosperity of industrial society. 
The brightest, most successful and ambitious of these will emerge as truly 
Sovereign Individuals. 

At first, only a handful will achieve full financial sovereignty. But this 
does not negate the advantages of financial independence. The fact that not 
everyone attains an equally vast fortune does not mean that it is futile or 
meaningless to become rich. There are 25,000 millionaires for every billion- 
aire. If you are a millionaire and not a billionaire, that does not make you 
poor. Equally, in the future, one of the milestones by which you measure 
your financial success will be not just now many zeroes you can add to your 
net worth, but whether you can structure your affairs in a way that enables 
you to realize full individual autonomy and independénce. The more clever 
you are, the less propulsion you will require to achieve financial escape 
velocity. Persons of even quite modest means will soar as the gravitational 
pull of politics on the global economy weakens. Unprecedented financial 
independence will be a reachable goal in your lifetime or that of your 
children. 

At the highest plateau of productivity, these Sovereign Individuals will 
compete and interact on terms that echo the relations among the gods in 
Greek myth. The elusive Mount Olympus of the next millennium will be in 
cyberspace—a realm without physical existence that will nonetheless de- 
velop what promises to be the world’s largest economy by the second decade 
of the new millennium. By 2025, the cybereconomy will have many millions 
of participants. Some of them will be as rich as Bill Gates, worth tens of 
billions of dollars each. The cyberpoor may be those with an income of less 
than $200,000 a year. There will be no cyberwelfare. No cybertaxes and no 


The Transition of the Year 2000 19 


cybergovernment. The cybereconomy, rather than China, could well be the 
greatest economic phenomenon of the next thirty years. 

The good news is that politicians will no more be able to dominate, 
suppress, and regulate the greater part of commerce in this new realm than 
the legislators of the ancient Greek city-states could have trimmed the beard 
of Zeus. That is good news for the rich. And even better news for the not so 
rich. The obstacles and burdens that politics imposes are more obstacles to 
becoming rich than to being rich. The benefits of declining returns to vio- 
lence and devolving jurisdictions will create scope for every energetic and 
ambitious person to benefit from the death of politics. Even the consumers 
of government services will benefit as entrepreneurs extend the benefits of 
competition. Heretofore, competition between jurisdictions has usually 
meant competition by means of violence to enforce the rule of a predominant 
group. Consequently, much of the ingenuity of interjurisdictional competi- 
tion was channeled into military endeavor. But the advent of the cybereco- 
nomy will bring competition on new terms to provision of sovereignty 
services. A proliferation of jurisdictions will mean proliferating experimen- 
tation in new ways of enforcing contracts and otherwise securing the safety 
of persons and property. The liberation of a large part of the global economy 
from political control will oblige whatever remains of government as we 
have known it to operate on more nearly market terms. Governments will 
ultimately have little choice but to treat populations in territories they serve 
more like customers, and less in the way that organized criminals treat the 
victims of a shakedown racket. 


Beyond Politics 


What mythology described as the province of the gods will become a viable 
option for the individual—a life outside the reach of kings and councils. 
First in scores, then in hundreds, and ultimately in the millions, individuals 
will escape the shackles of politics. As they do, they will transform the 
character of governments, shrinking the realm of compulsion and widening 
the scope of private control over resources. 

The emergence of the sovereign individual will demonstrate yet again the 
strange prophetic power of myth. Conceiving little of the laws of nature, the 
early agricultural peoples imagined that “powers we should call supernatu- 
ral” were widely distributed. These powers were sometimes employed by 
men, sometimes by “incarnate human gods” who looked like men and 
interacted with them in what Sir James George Frazer described in The 
Golden Bough as “a great democracy.” ’ 

When the ancients imagined the children of Zeus living among them they 
were inspired by a deep belief in magic. They shared with other primitive 


20 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


agricultural peoples an awe of nature, and a superstitious conviction that 
nature’s works were set in motion by individual volition, by magic. In that 
sense, there was nothing self-consciously prophetic about their view of 
nature and their gods. They were far from anticipating microtechnology. 
They could not have imagined its impact in altering the marginal productiv- 
ity of individuals thousands of years later. They certainly could not have 
foreseen how it would shift the balance between power and efficiency and 
thus revolutionize the way that assets are created and protected. Yet what 
they imagined as they spun their myths has a strange resonance with the 
world you are likely to see. 


Alt. Abracadabra 


The “abracadabra” of the magic invocation, for example, bears a curious 
similarity to the password employed to access a computer. In some respects, 
high-speed computation has already made it possible to mimic the magic of 
the genie. Early generations of “digital servants” already obey the com- 
mands of those who control the computers in which they are sealed much as 
genies were sealed in magic lamps. The virtual reality of information tech- 
nology will widen the realm of human wishes to make almost anything that 
can be imagined seem real. Telepresence will give living individuals the 
same capacity to span distance at supernatural speed and monitor events 
from afar that the Greeks supposed was enjoyed by Hermes and Apollo. The 
Sovereign Individuals of the Information Age, like the gods of ancient and 
primitive myths, will in due course enjoy a kind of “diplomatic immunity” 
from most of the political woes that have beset mortal human beings in most 
times and places. 

The new Sovereign Individual will operate like the gods of myth in the 
same physical environment as the ordinary, subject citizen, but in a separate 
realm politically. Commanding vastly greater resources and beyond the reach 
of many forms of compulsion, the Sovereign Individual will redesign gov- 
ernments and reconfigure economies in the new millennium. The full impli- 
cations of this change are all but unimaginable. 


Genius and Nemesis 


For anyone who loves human aspiration and success, the Information Age 
will provide a bounty. That is surely the best news in many generations. But 
it is bad news as well. The new organization of society implied by the 
triumph of individual autonomy and the true equalization of opportunity 
based upon merit will lead to very great rewards for merit and great individ- 
ual autonomy. This will leave individuals far more responsible for them- 


The Transition of the Year 2000 21 


selves than they have been accustomed to being during the industrial period. 
It will also precipitate transition crises, including a possibly severe economic 
depression that will reduce the unearned advantage in living standards that 
has been enjoyed by residents of advanced industrial societies throughout 
the twentieth century. As we write, the top 15 percent of the world’s popula- 
tion have an average per-capita income of $21,000 annually. The remaining 
85 percent of the world have an average income of just $1,000. That huge, 
hoarded advantage from the past is bound to dissipate under the new condi- 
tions of the Information Age. 

As it does, the capacity of nation-states to redistribute income on a large 
scale will collapse. Information technology facilitates dramatically increased 
competition between jurisdictions. When technology is mobile, and transac- 
tions occur in cyberspace, as they increasingly will do, governments will no 
longer be able to charge more for their services than they are worth to the 
people who pay for them. Anyone with a portable computer and a satellite 
link will be able to conduct almost any information business anywhere, and 
that includes almost the whole of the world’s multitrillion-dollar financial 
transactions. 

This means that you will no longer be obliged to live in a high-tax 
jurisdiction in order to earn high income. In the future, when most wealth 
can be earned anywhere, and even spent anywhere, governments that attempt 
to charge too much as the price of domicile will merely drive away their best 
customers. If our reasoning is correct, and we believe it is, the nation-state 
as we know it will not endure in anything like its present form. 


THE END OF NATIONS 


Changes that diminish the power of predominant institutions are both unset- 
tling and dangerous. Just as monarchs, lords, popes, and potentates fought 
ruthlessly to preserve their accustomed privileges in the early stages of the 
modern period, so today’s governments will employ violence, often of a 
covert and arbitrary kind, in the attempt to hold back the clock. Weakened by 
the challenge from technology, the state will treat increasingly autonomous 
individuals, its former citizens, with the same range of ruthlessness and 
diplomacy it has heretofore displayed in its dealing with other governments. 
The advent of this new stage in history was punctuated with a bang on 
August 20, 1998, when the United States fired about $200 million worth 
of Tomahawk BGM-109 sea-launched cruise missiles at targets allegedly 
associated with an exiled Saudi millionaire, Osama bin Laden. Bin Laden 
became the first person in history to have his satellite phone targeted for 
attack by cruise missiles. Simultaneously, the United States destroyed a 


22 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


pharmaceutical plant in Khartoum, Sudan, in Bin Laden’s honor. The emer- 
gence of Bin Laden as the enemy-in-chief of the United States reflects a 
momentous change in the nature of warfare. A single individual, albeit one 
with hundreds of millions of dollars, can now be depicted as a plausible 
threat to the greatest military power of the Industrial era. In statements 
reminiscent of propaganda employed during the Cold War about the Soviet 
Union, the United States president and his national security aides portrayed 
Bin Laden, a private individual, as a transnational terrorist and leading 
enemy of the United States. 

The same military logic that has seen Osama bin Laden elevated to a 
position as the chief enemy of the United States will assert itself in govern- 
ments’ internal relations with their subjects. Increasingly harsh techniques 
of exaction will be a logical corollary of the emergence of a new type of 
bargaining between governments and individuals. Technology will make 
individuals more nearly sovereign than ever before. And they will be treated 
that way. Sometimes violently, as enemies, sometimes as equal parties in 
negotiation, sometimes as allies. But however ruthlessly governments be- 
have, particularly in the transition period, wedding the IRS with the CIA 
will avail them little. They will be increasingly required by the press of 
necessity to bargain with autonomous individuals whose resources will no 
longer be so easily controlled. 

The changes implied by the Information Revolution will not only create a 
fiscal crisis for governments, they will tend to disintegrate all large struc- 
tures. Fourteen empires have disappeared already in the twentieth century. 
The breakdown of empires is part of a process that will dissolve the nation- 
state itself. Government will have to adapt to the growing autonomy of the 
individual. Taxing capacity will plunge by 50—70 percent. This will tend 
to make smaller jurisdictions more successful. The challenge of setting 
competitive terms to attract able individuals and their capital will be more 
easily undertaken in enclaves than across continents. 

We believe that as the modern nation-state decomposes, latter-day barbar- 
ians will increasingly come to exercise power behind the scenes. Groups like 
the Russian mafiya, which picks the bones of the former Soviet Union, other 
ethnic criminal gangs, nomenklaturas,* drug lords, and renegade covert 
agencies will be laws unto themselves. They already are. Far more than is 
widely understood, the modern barbarians have already infiltrated the forms 
of the nation-state without greatly changing its appearances. They are micro- 
parasites feeding on a dying system. As violent and unscrupulous as a state 
at war, these groups employ the techniques of the state on a smaller scale. 
Their growing influence and power are part of the downsizing of politics. 


* Nomenklaturas are the entrenched elites that ruled the former Soviet Union and other 
state-run economies. 


The Transition of the Year 2000 23 


Microprocessing reduces the size that groups must attain in order to be 
effective in the use and control of violence. As this technological revolution 
unfolds, predatory violence will be organized more and more outside of 
central control. Efforts to contain violence will also devolve in ways that 
depend more upon efficiency than magnitude of power. 


History in Reverse 


The process by which the nation-state grew over the past five centuries will 
be put into reverse by the new logic of the Information Age. Local centers 
of power will reassert themselves as the state devolves into fragmented, 
overlapping sovereignties.* The growing power of organized crime is merely 
one reflection of this tendency. Multinational companies are already having 
to subcontract all but essential work. Some conglomerates, such as AT&T, 
Unisys, and ITT, have split themselves into several firms 1n order to function 
more profitably. The nation-state will devolve like an unwieldy conglom- 
erate, but probably not before it is forced to do so by financial crises. 

Not only is power in the world changing, but the work of the world is 
changing as well. This means that the way business operates will inevitably 
change. The “virtual corporation” is evidence of a sweeping transformation 
in the nature of the firm, facilitated by the drop in information and transac- 
tion costs. We explore the implications of the Information Revolution for 
dissolving corporations and doing away with the “good job.” In the Informa- 
tion Age, a “job” will be a task to do, not a position you “have.” Micro- 
processing has created entirely new horizons of economic activity that 
transcend territorial boundaries. This transcendence of frontiers and territo- 
ries is perhaps the most revolutionary development since Adam and Eve 
straggled out of paradise under the sentence of their Maker: “In the sweat 
of thy face shalt thou eat bread.” As technology revolutionizes the tools we 
use, it also antiquates our laws, reshapes our morals, and alters our percep- 
tions. This book explains how. 

Microprocessing and rapidly improving communications already make it 
possible for the individual to choose where to work. Transactions on the 
Internet or the World Wide Web can be encrypted and will soon be almost 
impossible for tax collectors to capture. Tax-free money already compounds 
far faster offshore than onshore funds still subject to the high tax burden 
imposed by the twentieth-century nation-state. After the turn of the millen- 
nium, much of the world’s commerce will migrate into the new realm of 
cyberspace, a region where governments will have no more dominion than 
they exercise over the bottom of the sea or the outer planets. In cyberspace, 
the threats of physical violence that have been the alpha and omega 
of politics since time immemorial will vanish. In cyberspace, the meek 


24 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


and the mighty will meet on equal terms. Cyberspace is the ultimate off- 
shore jurisdiction. An economy with no taxes. Bermuda in the sky with 
diamonds. 

When this greatest tax haven of them all is fully open for business, all 
funds will essentially be offshore funds at the discretion of their owner. This 
will have cascading consequences. The state has grown used to treating its 
taxpayers as a farmer treats his cows, keeping them in a field to be milked. 
Soon, the cows will have wings. 


The Revenge of Nations 


Like an angry farmer, the state will no doubt take desperate measures at first 
to tether and hobble its escaping herd. It will employ covert and even violent 
means to restrict access to liberating technologies. Such expedients will 
work only temporarily, if at all. The twentieth-century nation-state, with all 
its pretensions, will starve to death as its tax revenues decline. 

When the state finds itself unable to meet its committed expenditure by 
raising tax revenues, it will resort to other, more desperate measures. Among 
them is printing money. Governments have grown used to enjoying a monop- 
oly over currency that they could depreciate at will. This arbitrary inflation 
has been a prominent feature of the monetary policy of all twentieth-century 
states. Even the best national currency of the postwar period, the German 
mark, lost 71 percent of its value from January 1, 1949, through the end of 
June 1995. In the same period, the U.S. dollar lost 84 percent of its value.’ 
This inflation had the same effect as a tax on all who hold the currency. As 
we explore later, inflation as revenue option will be largely foreclosed by the 
emergence of cybermoney. New technologies will, allow the holders of 
wealth to bypass the national monopolies that have issued and regulated 
money in the modern period. Indeed, the credit crises that swept through 
Asia, Russia, and other emerging economies 1n 1997 and 1998 attest to the 
fact that national currencies and national credit ratings are anachronisms 
inimical to the smooth operation of the global economy. It is precisely 
the fact that the demands of sovereignty require all transactions within a 
jurisdiction to be denominated in a national currency that creates the vulner- 
ability to mistakes by central bankers and attacks by speculators which 
precipitated deflationary crises in one jurisdiction after another. In the Infor- 
mation Age, individuals will be able to use cybercurrencies and thus declare 
their monetary independence. When individuals can conduct their own mon- 
etary policies over the World Wide Web it will matter less or not at all 
that the state continues to control the industrial-era printing presses. Their 
importance for controlling the world’s wealth will be transcended by mathe- 
matical algorithms that have no physical existence. In the new millennium, 


The Transition of the Year 2000 25 


cybermoney controlled by private markets will supersede fiat money issued 
by governments. Only the poor will be victims of inflation and ensuing 
collapses into deflation that are consequences of the artificial leverage which 
fiat money injects into the economy. 

Lacking their accustomed scope to tax and inflate, governments, even in 
traditionally civil countries, will turn nasty. As income tax becomes uncol- 
lectible, older and more arbitrary methods of exaction will resurface. The 
ultimate form of withholding tax—de facto or even overt hostage-taking— 
will be introduced by governments desperate to prevent wealth from escap- 
ing beyond their reach. Unlucky individuals will find themselves singled out 
and held to ransom in an almost medieval fashion. Businesses that offer 
services that facilitate the realization of autonomy by individuals will be 
subject to infiltration, sabotage, and disruption. Arbitrary forfeiture of prop- 
erty, already commonplace in the United States, where it occurs five thou- 
sand times a week, will become even more pervasive. Governments will 
violate human rights, censor the free flow of information, sabotage useful 
technologies, and worse. For the same reasons that the late, departed Soviet 
Union tried in vain to suppress access to personal computers and Xerox 
machines, Western governments will seek to suppress the cybereconomy by 
totalitarian means. 


RETURN OF THE LUDDITES 


Such methods may prove popular among some population segments. The 
good news about individual liberation and autonomy will seem to be bad 
news to many who are frightened by the transition crisis and do not expect 
to be winners in the new configuration of society. The apparent popularity of 
the draconian capital controls imposed in 1998 by Malaysian prime minister 
Mahathir Mohamad in the wake of the Asian meltdown testifies to residual 
enthusiasm among many for the old-fashioned closed economy dominated 
by the nation-state. This nostalgia for the past will be fed by resentments 
inflamed by the inevitable transition crisis. The greatest resentment is likely 
to be centered among those of middle talent in currently rich countries. They 
particularly may come to feel that information technology poses a threat to 
their way of life. The beneficiaries of organized compulsion, including mil- 
lions receiving income redistributed by governments, may resent the new 
freedom realized by Sovereign Individuals. Their upset will illustrate the 
truism that “where you stand is determined by where you sit.” 


26 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


“Sometimes I wondered how I could experience such deep misery over the fate 
of a handful,of men I did not know, playing a game against another group of 
strangers in a ballpark hundreds of miles away. The answer is simple. I loved 
my teams. Although risky, caring was worth its price. Sports fired up my blood, 
excited me, made my heart pound. I liked having something at stake. Life was 
more vivid during a contest.” 

—CRAIG LAMBERT 


It would be misleading, however, to attribute all the bad feelings that will 
be generated in the coming transition crisis to the bald desire to live at 
someone else’s expense. More will be involved. The very character of human 
society suggests that there is bound to be a misguided moral dimension to 
the coming Luddite reaction. Think of it as a bald desire fitted with a moral 
toupee. We explore the moral and moralistic dimensions of the transition 
crisis. Self-interested grasping of a conscious kind has far less power to 
motivate actions than does self-righteous fury. While adherence to the civic 
myths of the twentieth century is rapidly falling away, they are not without 
their true believers. Many humans, as the passage quoted from Craig Lam- 
bert attests, are belongers, who place importance on being members of a 
group. The same need to identify that motivates fans of organized sports 
makes some partisans of nations. Everyone who came of age in the twentieth 
century has been inculcated in the duties and obligations of the twentieth- 
century citizen. The residual moral imperatives from industrial society will 
stimulate at least some neo-Luddite attacks on information technologies. 

In this sense, this violence to come will be at least partially an expression 
of what we call “moral anachronism,” the application of moral strictures 
drawn from one stage of economic life to the circumstances of another. 
Every stage of society requires its own moral rules to help individuals 
overcome incentive traps peculiar to the choices they face in that particular 
way of life. Just as a farming society could not live by the moral rules of a 
migratory Eskimo band, so the Information Society cannot satisfy moral 
imperatives that emerged to facilitate the success of a militant twentieth- 
century industrial state. We explain why. 

In the next few years, moral anachronism will be in evidence at the core 
countries of the West in much the way that it has been witnessed at the 
periphery over the past five centuries. Western colonists and military expedi- 
tions stimulated such crises when they encountered indigenous hunting-and- 
gathering bands, as well as peoples whose societies were still organized for 
farming. The introduction of new technologies into anachronistic settings 
caused confusion and moral crises. The success of Christian missionaries in 
converting millions of indigenous peoples can be laid in large measure to 


The Transition of the Year 2000 27 


the local crises caused by the sudden introduction of new power arrange- 
ments from the outside. Such encounters recurred over and over, from the 
sixteenth century through the early decades of the twentieth century. We 
expect similar clashes early in the new millennium as Information Societies 
supplant those organized along industrial lines. 


The Nostalgia for Compulsion 


The rise of the Information Society will not be wholly welcomed as a 
promising new phase of history, even among those who benefit from it most. 
Everyone will feel some misgivings. And many will despise innovations that 
undermine the territorial nation-state. It is a fact of human nature that radical 
change of any kind is almost always seen as a dramatic turn for the worse. 
Five hundred years ago, the courtiers gathered around the duke of Burgundy 
would have said that unfolding innovations that undermined feudalism were 
evil. They thought the world was rapidly spiraling downhill at the very time 
that later historians saw an explosion of human potential in the Renaissance. 
Likewise, what may someday be seen as a new Renaissance from the per- 
spective of the next millennium will look frightening to tired twentieth- 
century eyes. 

There is a high probability that some who are offended by the new ways, 
as well as many who are disadvantaged by them, will react unpleasantly. 
Their nostalgia for compulsion will probably turn violent. Encounters with 
these new “Luddites” will make the transition to radical new forms of social 
organization at least a measure of bad news for everyone. Get ready to duck. 
With the speed of change outracing the moral and economic capacity of 
many in living generations to adapt, you can expect to see a fierce and 
indignant resistance to the Information Revolution, notwithstanding its great 
promise to liberate the future. 

You must understand and prepare for such unpleasantness. A series of 
transition crises lies ahead. Deflationary tribulations, such as the Asian 
contagion that swept through the Far East to Russia and other emerging 
economies in 1997 and 1998, will erupt sporadically as the dated national 
and international institutions left over from the Industrial Era prove inade- 
quate to the challenges of the new, dispersed, transnational economy. The 
new information and communication technologies are more subversive of 
the modern state than any political threat to its predominance since Colum- 
bus sailed. This is important because those in power have seldom reacted 
peacefully to developments that undermined their authority. They are not 
likely to now. 

The clash between the new and the old will shape the early years of the 
new millennium. We expect it to be a time of great danger and great reward, 


28 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


and a time of much diminished civility in some realms and unprecedented 
scope in others. Increasingly autonomous individuals and bankrupt, desper- 
ate governments will confront one another across a new divide. We expect 
to see a radical restructuring of the nature of sovereignty and the virtual 
death of politics before the transition is over. Instead of state domination and 
control of resources, you are destined to see the privatization of almost all 
services governments now provide. For inescapable reasons that we explore 
in this book, information technology will destroy the capacity of the state to 
charge more for its services than they are worth to you and other people 
who pay for them. 


“Governments will have to deal with what sovereignty means.” 


—ROBERT MARTIN, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, LUCENT TECHNOLOGIES 


Sovereignty Through Markets 


To an extent that few would have imagined only a decade ago, individuals 
will achieve increasing autonomy over territorial nation-states through mar- 
ket mechanisms. All nation-states face bankruptcy and the rapid erosion of 
their authority. Mighty as they are, the power they retain is the power to 
obliterate, not to command. Their intercontinental missiles and aircraft carri- 
ers are already artifacts, as imposing and useless as the last warhorse of 
feudalism. 

Information technology makes possible a dramatic extension of markets 
by altering the way that assets are created and protected. This is revolution- 
ary. Indeed, it promises to be more revolutionary for industrial society than 
the advent of gunpowder proved to be for feudal agriculture. The transforma- 
tion of the year 2000 implies the commercialization of sovereignty and the 
death of politics, no less than guns implied the demise of oath-based feudal- 
ism. Citizenship will go the way of chivalry. 

We believe that the age of individual economic sovereignty is coming. 
Just as steel mills, telephone companies, mines, and railways that were once 
“nationalized” have been rapidly privatized throughout the world, you will 
soon see the ultimate form of privatization—the sweeping denationalization 
of the individual. The Sovereign Individual of the new millennium will no 
longer be an asset of the state, a de facto item on the treasury’s balance 
sheet. After the transition of the year 2000, denationalized citizens will no 
longer be citizens as we know them, but customers. 


The Transition of the Year 2000 29 


BANDWIDTH TRUMPS BORDERS 


The commercialization of sovereignty will make the terms and conditions 
of citizenship in the nation-state as dated as chivalric oaths seemed after the 
collapse of feudalism. Instead of relating to a powerful state as citizens to 
be taxed, the Sovereign Individuals of the twenty-first century will be cus- 
tomers of governments operating from a “new logical space.” They will 
bargain for whatever minimal government they need and pay for it according 
to contract. The governments of the Information Age will be organized 
along different principles than those which the world has come to expect 
over the past several centuries. Some jurisdictions and sovereignty services 
will be formed through “assortive matching,” a system by which affinities, 
including commercial affinities, are the basis upon which virtual jurisdic- 
tions earn allegiance. In rare cases, the new sovereignties may be holdovers 
of medieval organizations, like the 900-year-old Sovereign Military Hospi- 
taller Order of St. John of Jerusalem, of Rhodes and of Malta. More com- 
monly known as the Knights of Malta, the order is an affinity group for rich 
Catholics, with 10,000 current members and an annual income of several 
billions. The Knights of Malta issues its own passports, stamps, and money, 
and carries on full diplomatic relations with seventy countries. As we write 
it is negotiating with the Republic of Malta to reassume possession of Fort 
St. Angelo. Taking possession of the castle would give the Knights the 
missing ingredient of territoriality that will enable it to be recognized as a 
sovereignty. The Knights of Malta could once again become a sovereign 
microstate, instantly legitimized by a long history. It was from Fort St. 
Angelo that the Knights of Malta turned back the Turks in the Great Siege 
of 1565. Indeed, they ruled Malta for many years thereafter, until they were 
expelled by Napoleon in 1798. If the Knights of Malta were to return in the 
next few years, there could be no clearer evidence that the modern nation- 
state system, ushered in after the French Revolution, was merely an interlude 
in the longer sweep of history in which it has been the norm for many kinds 
of sovereignties to exist at the same time. 

Still another and very different model for a postmodern sovereignty based 
on assortive matching is the Iridium satellite telephone network. At first 
glance, you may think it odd to treat a cellular telephone service as a kind 
of sovereignty. Yet Iridium has already received recognition as a virtual 
sovereignty by international authorities. As you may know, Iridium is a 
global cellular phone service that allows subscribers to receive calls on a 
single number, wherever they find themselves on the planet, from Feath- 
erston, New Zealand, to the Bolivian Chaco. To allow calls to be routed to 
Iridium subscribers anywhere on the globe, given the architecture of global 


30 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


telecoms, international telecom authorities had to agree to recognize Iridium 
as a virtual country, with its own country code: 8816. It is a short step 
logically from a virtual country comprising satellite telephone subscribers to 
sovereignty for more coherent virtual communities on the World Wide Web 
that span borders. Bandwidth, or the carrying capacity of a communications 
medium, has been expanding faster than computational capacity multiplied 
after the invention of transistors. If this trend to greater bandwidth continues, 
as we believe likely, it is only a matter of a few years, soon after the turn of 
the millennium, until bandwidth becomes sufficiently capacious to make 
technically possible the “metaverse,” the alternative, cyberspace world 
imagined by the science fiction novelist Neal Stephenson. Stephenson’s 
“metaverse” is a dense virtual community with its own laws. We believe it 
is inevitable that, as the cybereconomy becomes richer, its participants will 
seek and obtain exemption from the anachronistic laws of nation-states. The 
new cybercommunities will be at least as wealthy and competent at advanc- 
ing their interests as the Sovereign Military Hospitaller Order of St. John of 
Jerusalem, of Rhodes and of Malta. Indeed, they will be more capable of 
asserting themselves because of far-reaching communications and informa- 
tion warfare capabilities. We explore still other models of fragmented sover- 
eignty in which small groups can effectively lease the sovereignty of weak 
nation-states, and operate their own economic havens much as free ports and 
free trade zones are licensed to do today. 

A new moral vocabulary will be required to describe the relations of Sover- 
eign Individuals with one another and what remains of government. We sus- 
pect that as the terms of these new relations come into focus, they will offend 
many people who came of age as “citizens” of twentieth-century nation- 
states. The end of nations and the “denationalization of the individual” will 
deflate some warmly held notions, such as “equal protection under the law,” 
that presuppose power relations that are soon to be obsolete. As virtual com- 
munities gain coherence, they will insist that their members be held account- 
able according to their own laws, rather than those of the former nation-states 
in which they happen to reside. Multiple systems of law will again coexist 
over the same geographic area, as they did in ancient and medieval times. 

Just as attempts to preserve the power of knights in armor were doomed 
to fail in the face of gunpowder weapons, so the modern notions of national- 
ism and citizenship are destined to be short-circuited by microtechnology. 
Indeed, they will eventually become comic in much the way that the sacred 
principles of fifteenth-century feudalism fell to ridicule in the sixteenth 
century. The cherished civic notions of the twentieth century will be comic 
anachronisms to new generations after the transformation of the year 2000. 
The Don Quixote of the twenty-first century will not be a knight-errant 
struggling to revive the glories of feudalism but a bureaucrat in a brown suit, 
a tax collector yearning for a citizen to audit. 


The Transition of the Year 2000 31 


REVIVING LAWS OF THE MARCH 


We seldom think of governments as competitive entities, except in the 
broadest sense, so the modern intuition about the range and possibilities of 
sovereignty has atrophied. In the past, when the power equation made it 
more difficult for groups to assert a stable monopoly of coercion, power 
was frequently fragmented, jurisdictions overlapped, and entities of many 
different kinds exercised one or more of the attributes of sovereignty. Not 
infrequently, the nominal overlord actually enjoyed scant power on the 
ground. Governments weaker than the nation-states are now faced with 
sustained competition in their ability to impose a monopoly of coercion over 
a local territory. This competition gave rise to adaptations in controlling 
violence and attracting allegiance that will soon be new again. 

When the reach of lords and kings was weak, and the claims of one or 
more groups overlapped at a frontier, it frequently happened that neither 
could decisively dominate the other. In the Middle Ages, there were numer- 
ous frontier or “march” regions where sovereignties blended together. These 
violent frontiers persisted for decades or even centuries in the border areas 
of Europe. There were marches between areas of Celtic and English control 
in Ireland; between Wales and England, Scotland and England, Italy and 
France, France and Spain, Germany and the Slav frontiers of Central Europe, 
and between the Christian kingdoms of Spain and the Islamic kingdom of 
Granada. Such march regions developed distinct institutional and legal forms 
of a kind that we are likely to see again in the next millennium. Because of 
the competitive position of the two authorities, residents of march regions 
seldom paid tax. What is more, they usually had a choice in deciding whose 
laws they were to obey, a choice that was exercised through such legal 
concepts as “avowal” and “distraint” that have now all but vanished. We 
expect such concepts to become a prominent feature of the law of Informa- 
tion Societies. 


Transcending Nationality 


Before the nation-state, it was difficult to enumerate precisely the number of 
sovereignties that existed in the world because they overlapped in complex 
ways and many varied forms of organization exercised power. They will do 
so again. The dividing lines between territories tended to become clearly 
demarcated and fixed as borders in the nation-state system. They will 
become hazy again in the Information Age. In the new millennium, sover- 
eignty will be fragmented once more. New entities will emerge exercising 
some but not all of the characteristics we have come to associate with 
governments. 


32 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Some of these new entities, like the Knights Templar and other religious 
military orders of the Middle Ages, may control considerable wealth and 
military power without controlling any fixed territory. They will be orga- 
nized on principles that bear no relation to nationality at all. Members and 
leaders of religious corporations that exercised sovereign authority in parts 
of Europe in the Middle Ages in no sense derived their authority from 
national identity. They were of all ethnic backgrounds and professed to owe 
their allegiance to God, and not to any affinities that members of a nationality 
are supposed to share in common. 


Merchant Republics of Cyberspace 


You will also see the re-emergence of associations of merchants and wealthy 
individuals with semisovereign powers, like the Hanse (confederation of 
merchants) in the Middle Ages. The Hanse that operated in the French 
and Flemish fairs grew to encompass the merchants of sixty cities.!° The 
“Hanseatic League,” as it is redundantly known in English (the literal trans- 
lation is “Leaguely League”), was an organization of Germanic merchant 
guilds that provided protection to members and negotiated trade treaties. It 
came to exercise semisovereign powers in a number of Northern European 
and Baltic cities. Such entities will re-emerge in place of the dying nation- 
state in the new millennium, providing protection and helping to enforce 
contracts in an unsafe world. 

In short, the future is likely to confound the expectations of those who 
have absorbed the civic myths of twentieth-century industrial society. 
Among them are the illusions of social democracy that once thrilled and 
motivated the most gifted minds. They presuppose that societies evolve in 
whatever way governments wish them to—preferably in response to opinion 
polls and scrupulously counted votes. This was never as true as it seemed 
fifty years ago. Now it is an anachronism, as much an artifact of industrial- 
ism as a rusting smokestack. The civic myths reflect not only a mindset that 
sees society’s problems as susceptible to engineering solutions; they also 
reflect a false confidence that resources and individuals will remain as vul- 
nerable to political compulsion in the future as they have been in the twenti- 
eth century. We doubt it. Market forces, not political majorities, will compel 
societies to reconfigure themselves in ways that public opinion will neither 
comprehend nor welcome. As they do, the naive view that history is what 
people wish it to be will prove wildly misleading. 

It will therefore be crucial that you see the world anew. That means 
looking from the outside in to reanalyze much that you have probably taken 
for granted. This will enable you to come to a new understanding. If you fail 
to transcend conventional thinking at a time when conventional thinking 


The Transition of the Year 2000 33 


is losing touch with reality, then you will be more likely to fall prey to 
an epidemic of disorientation that lies ahead. Disorientation breeds mis- 
takes that could threaten your business, your investments, and your way 
of life. 


“The universe rewards us for understanding it and punishes us for not under- 
standing it. When we understand the universe, our plans work and we feel 
good. Conversely, if we try to fly by jumping off a cliff and flapping our arms 
the universe will kill us.” 


—JACK COHEN AND IAN STEWART 


Seeing Anew 


To prepare yourself for the world that is coming you must understand why 
it will be different from what most experts tell you. That involves looking 
closely at the hidden causes of change. We have attempted to do this with 
an unorthodox analysis we call the study of megapolitics. In two previous 
volumes, Blood in the Streets and The Great Reckoning, we argued that the 
most important causes of change are not to be found in political manifestos 
or in the pronouncements of dead economists, but in the hidden factors that 
alter the boundaries where power is exercised. Often, subtle changes in 
climate, topography, microbes, and technology alter the logic of violence. 
They transform the way people organize their livelihoods and defend them- 
selves. 

Notice that our approach to understanding how the world changes is very 
different from that of most forecasters. We are not experts in anything, in 
the sense that we pretend to know a great deal more about certain “subjects” 
than those who have spent their entire careers cultivating highly specialized 
knowledge. To the contrary, we look from the outside in. We are knowledge- 
able around the subjects about which we make forecasts. Most of all, this 
involves seeing where the boundaries of necessity are drawn. When they 
change, society necessarily changes, no matter what people may wish to the 
contrary. 

In our view, the key to understanding how societies evolve is to understand 
factors that determine the costs and rewards of employing violence. Every 
human society, from the hunting band to the empire, has been informed by 
the interactions of megapolitical factors that set the prevailing version of the 
“laws of nature.” Life is always and everywhere complex. The lamb and the 
lion keep a delicate balance, interacting at the margin. If lions were suddenly 
more swift, they would catch prey that now escape. If lambs suddenly grew 


34 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


wings, lions would starve. The capacity to utilize and defend against vio- 
lence is the crucial variable that alters life at the margin. 


We put violence at the center of our theory of megapolitics for good 


reason. The control of violence is the most important dilemma every society 
faces. As we wrote in The Great Reckoning: 


The reason that people resort to violence is that it often pays. In some ways, 
the simplest thing a man can do if he wants money is to take it. That is no less 
true for an army of men seizing an oil field than it is for a single thug taking 
a wallet. Power, as William Playfair wrote, “has always sought the readiest 
road to wealth, by attacking those who were in possession of it.” 

The challenge to prosperity is precisely that predatory violence does pay 
well in some circumstances. War does change things. It changes the rules. It 
changes the distribution of assets and income. It even determines who lives 
and who dies. It is precisely the fact that violence does pay that makes it hard 
to control.!? 


Thinking in these terms has helped us foresee a number of developments 


that better-informed experts insisted could never happen. For example, 
Blood in the Streets, published in early 1987, was our attempt to survey the 
first stages of the great megapolitical revolution now under way. We argued 
then that technological change was destabilizing the power equation in the 
world. Among our principal points: 


We said that American predominance was in decline, which would lead to 
economic imbalances and distress, including another 1929-style stock 
market crash. Experts were all but unanimous in denying that such a thing 
could happen. Yet within six months, in October 1987, world markets 
were convulsed by the most violent sell-off of the century. 

We told readers to expect the collapse of Communism. Again, experts 
laughed. Yet 1989 brought the events that “no one could have predicted.” 
The Berlin Wall fell, as revolutions swept away Communist regimes from 
the Baltic to Bucharest. 

We explained why the multiethnic empire the Bolshevik nomenklatura 
inherited from the tsars would “inevitably crack apart.” At the end of 
December 1991, the hammer-and-sickle banner was lowered over the 
Kremlin for the last time as the Soviet Union ceased to exist. 

During the height of the Reagan arms buildup, we argued that the world 
stood at the threshold of sweeping disarmament. This, too, was considered 
unlikely, if not preposterous. Yet the following seven years brought the 
most sweeping disarmament since the close of World War I. 

At a time when experts in North America and Europe were pointing to 


The Transition of the Year 2000 35 


Japan for support of the view that governments can successfully rig mar- 
kets, we said otherwise. We forecast that the Japanese financial assets 
boom would end in a bust. Soon after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the 
Japanese stock market crashed, losing almost half its value. We continue 
to believe that its ultimate low could match or exceed the 89 percent loss 
that Wall Street suffered at the bottom after 1929. 

¢ At a point when almost everyone, from the middle-class family to the 
world’s largest real estate investors, appeared to believe that property 
markets could only rise and not fall, we warned that a real estate bust was 
in the offing. Within four years, real estate investors throughout the world 
lost more than $1 trillion as property values dropped. 

¢ Long before it was obvious to the experts, we explained in Blood in the 
Streets that the income of blue-collar workers had decreased and was 
destined to continue falling on a long-term basis. As we write today, 
almost a decade later, it has at last begun to dawn on a sleepy world that 
this is true. Average hourly wages in the United States have fallen below 
those achieved in the second Eisenhower administration. In 1993, average 
annualized hourly wages in constant dollars were $18,808. In 1957, when 
Eisenhower was sworn in for his second term, U.S. annualized average 
hourly wages were $18,903. 


While the main themes of Blood in the Streets have proven remarkably 
accurate with the benefit of hindsight, only a few years ago they were 
considered rank nonsense by the guardians of conventional thinking. A 
reviewer in Newsweek in 1987 reflected the closed mental climate of late 
industrial society when he dismissed our analysis as “an unthinking attack 
on reason.” 

You might imagine that Newsweek and similar publications would have 
recognized with the passage of time that our line of analysis had revealed 
something useful about the way the world was changing. Not a bit. The first 
edition of The Great Reckoning was greeted with the same sniggering hostil- 
ity that welcomed Blood in the Streets. No less an authority than the Wall 
Street Journal categorically dismissed our analysis as the nattering of “your 
dopey aunt.” 

This chuckling aside, the themes of The Great Reckoning proved less 
ludicrous than the guardians of orthodoxy pretended. 


We extended our forecast of the death of the Soviet Union, exploring why 
Russia and the other former Soviet republics faced a future of growing 
civil disorder, hyperinflation, and falling living standards. 

¢ We explained why the 1990s would be a decade of downsizing, including 


36 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


for the first time a worldwide downsizing of governments as well as 
business entities. 

¢ We also forecast that there would be a major redefinition of terms of 
income redistribution, with sharp cutbacks in the level of benefits. Hints 
of fiscal crisis appeared from Canada to Sweden, and American politicians 
began to talk of “ending welfare as we know it.” 

¢ We anticipated and explained why the “new world order” would prove to 
be a “new world disorder.” Well before the atrocities in Bosnia engrossed 
the headlines, we warned that Yugoslavia would collapse into civil war. 

¢ Before Somalia slid into anarchy, we explained why the pending collapse 
of governments in Africa would lead some countries there to be effectively 
placed into receivership. 

¢ We forecast and explained why militant Islam would displace Marxism as 
the principal ideology of confrontation with the West. 

¢ Years before the Oklahoma bombing and the attempt to blow up the World 

Trade Center, we explained why the United States faced an upsurge in 

terrorism. 

Before the headlines that told of the rioting that swept Los Angeles, 

Toronto, and other cities, we explained why the emergence of criminal 

subcultures among urban minorities was setting the stage for widespread 

criminal violence. 

¢ We also anticipated “the final depression of the twentieth century,” which 
began in Asia in 1989 and has been spreading back from the periphery 
toward the center of the global system. We said that the Japanese stock 
market would follow Wall Street’s path after 1929, and that this would 
lead to credit collapse and depression. Although massive government in- 
tervention in Japan and elsewhere temporarily prevented markets from 
fully reflecting the deterioration of credit conditions, this only displaced 
and compounded economic distress, building pressures for competitive 
devaluations and a systemic credit collapse of the kind that imploded 
economies worldwide in the 1930s. 


The Great Reckoning also spelled out a number of controversial theses 
that have not yet been confirmed, or have not reached the level of develop- 
ment that we forecast: 


¢ We said that the Japanese stock market would follow Wall Street’s path 
after 1929, and that this would lead to credit collapse and depression. 
Although unemployment rates in Spain, Finland, and a few other countries 
exceeded those of the 1930s, and a number of countries, including Japan, 
did experience local depressions, there has not yet been a systemic credit 
collapse of the kind that imploded economies worldwide in the 1930s. 


The Transition of the Year 2000 37 


¢ We argued that the breakdown of the command-and-control system in the 
former Soviet Union would lead to the spread of nuclear weapons into the 
hands of ministates, terrorists, and criminal gangs. To the world’s good 
fortune, this has not come to pass, at least not to the degree that we feared. 
Press reports indicate that Iran purchased several tactical nuclear weapons 
on the black market; more worryingly, the Times of London reported on 
October 7, 1998, that “Osama bin Laden, the exiled millionaire Saudi 
terrorist leader, has acquired tactical nuclear weapons from the former 
Soviet Central Asian states, according to a leading Arab newspaper.” That 
said, there has been no officially confirmed deployment or use of nuclear 
weapons from the arsenals of the former Soviet Union. 

¢ We explained why the “War on Drugs” was a recipe for subverting the 
police and judicial systems of countries where drug use is widespread, 
particularly the United States. With tens of billions of dollars in hidden 
monopoly profits piling up each year, drug dealers have the means as well 
as the incentive to corrupt even apparently stable countries. While the 
world media have carried occasional stories hinting at high-level penetra- 
tion of the U.S. political system by drug money, the full story has not yet 
been told. 


Looking Where Others Don’t 


Notwithstanding the points where our forecasts were mistaken or seem mis- 
taken in light of what is now known, the record stands to scrutiny. Much of 
what is likely to figure in future economic histories of the 1990s was forecast 
or anticipated and explained in The Great Reckoning. Many of our predic- 
tions were not simple extrapolations or extensions of trends, but forecasts of 
major departures from what has been considered normal since World War 
II. We warned that the 1990s would be dramatically different from the 
previous five decades. Reading the news of 1991 through 1998, we see that 
the themes of The Great Reckoning were borne out almost daily. 

We see these developments not as examples of isolated difficulties, trou- 
ble here, trouble there, but as shocks and tremors that run along the same 
fault line. The old order is being toppled by a megapolitical earthquake 
that will revolutionize institutions and alter the way thinking people see the 
world. 

In spite of the central role of violence in determining the way the world 
works, it attracts surprisingly little serious attention. Most political analysts 
and economists write as if violence were a minor irritant, like a fly buzzing 
around a cake, and not the chef who baked it. 


38 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Another Megapolitical Pioneer 


In fact, there has been so little clear thinking about the role of violence in 
history that a bibliography of megapolitical analysis could be written on a 
single sheet of paper. In The Great Reckoning, we drew upon and elaborated 
arguments of an almost entirely forgotten classic of megapolitical analysis, 
William Playfair’s An Enquiry into the Permanent Causes of the Decline and 
Fall of Powerful and Wealthy Nations, published in 1805. Here one of our 
departure points is the work of Frederic C. Lane. Lane was a medieval 
historian who wrote several penetrating essays on the role of violence in 
history during the 1940s and 1950s. Perhaps the most comprehensive of 
these was “Economic Consequences of Organized Violence,” which ap- 
peared in the Journal of Economic History in 1958. Few people other than 
professional economists and historians have read it, and most of them seem 
not to have recognized its significance. Like Playfair, Lane wrote for an 
audience that did not yet exist. 


Insights for the Information Age 


Lane published his work on violence and the economic meaning of war well 
before the advent of the Information Age. He certainly was not writing in 
anticipation of microprocessing or the other technological revolutions now 
unfolding. Yet his insights into violence established a framework for under- 
standing how society will be reconfigured in the Information Revolution. 

The window Lane opened into the future was one through which he 
peered into the past. He was a medieval historian, and particularly a historian 
of a trading city, Venice, whose fortunes surged and sagged in a violent 
world. In thinking about how Venice rose and fell, his attention was attracted 
to issues that can help you understand the future. He saw the fact that how 
violence is organized and controlled plays a large role in determining “what 
uses are made of scarce resources.” !3 

We believe that Lane’s analyses of the competitive uses of violence has 
much to tell us about how life is likely to change in the Information Age. 
But don’t expect most people to notice, much less follow, so unfashionably 
abstract an argument. While the attention of the world is riveted on dishonest 
debates and wayward personalities, the meanderings of megapolitics con- 
tinue almost unnoted. The average North American has probably lavished 
one hundred times more attention on O. J. Simpson and Monica Lewinsky 
than he has on the new microtechnologies that are poised to antiquate his 
job and subvert the political system he depends on for unemployment com- 
pensation. 


The Transition of the Year 2000 39 


THE VANITY OF WISHES 


The tendency to overlook what is fundamentally important is not confined 
solely to the couch dweller watching television. Conventional thinkers of all 
shapes and sizes observe one of the pretenses of the democratic nation-state 
—that the views people hold determine the way the world changes. Appar- 
ently sophisticated analysts lapse into explanations and forecasts that inter- 
pret major historical developments as if they were determined in a wishful 
way. A striking example of this type of reasoning appeared on the editorial 
page of the New York Times just as we were writing: “Goodbye, Nation- 
State, Hello... What?,” by Nicholas Colchester.!* Not only was the topic, 
the death of the nation-state, the very topic we are addressing, but its author 
presents himself as an excellent marker to illustrate how far removed our 
way of thinking is from the norm. Colchester is no simpleton. He wrote as 
editorial director of the Economist Intelligence Unit. If anyone should form 
a realistic view of the world it should be he. Yet his article clearly indicates 
in several places that “the coming of international government” is “now 
logically unstoppable.” 

Why? Because the nation-state is faltering and can no longer control 
economic forces. 

In our view, this assumption verges on the absurd. To suppose that some 
specific new form of governance will emerge simply because another has 
failed is a fallacy. By that reasoning, Haiti and the Congo would long ago 
have had better government simply because what they had was so luminously 
inadequate. 

Colchester’s point of view, widely shared among the few who think about 
such things in North America and Europe, utterly fails to take into account 
the larger megapolitical forces that determine what types of political systems 
are actually viable. That is the focus of this book. When the technologies 
that are shaping the new millennium are considered, it is far more likely 
that we will see not one world government, but microgovernment, or even 
conditions approaching anarchy. 

For every serious analysis of the role of violence in determining the rules 
by which everyone operates, dozens of books have been written about the 
intricacies of wheat subsidies, and hundreds more about arcane aspects of 
monetary policy. Much of this shortfall in thinking about the crucial issues 
that actually determine the course of history probably reflects the relative 
stability of the power configuration over the past several centuries. The bird 
that falls asleep on the back of a hippopotamus does not think about losing 
its perch until the hippo actually moves. Dreams, myths, and fantasies play 
a much larger role in informing the supposed social sciences than we com- 
monly think. 


40 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


This is particularly evident in the abundant literature of economic justice. 
Millions of words have been uttered and written about economic justice and 
injustice for each page devoted to careful analysis of how violence shapes 
society, and thus sets the boundaries within which economies must function. 
Yet formulations of economic justice in the modern context presuppose that 
society is dominated by an instrument of compulsion so powerful that it can 
take away and redistribute life’s good things. Such power has existed for 
only a few generations of the modern period. Now it is fading away. 


Big Brother on Social Security 


Industrial technology gave governments greater instruments of control in the 
twentieth century than ever before. For a time, it seemed inevitable that 
governments would become so effective at monopolizing violence as to 
leave little room for individual autonomy. Nobody at mid-century was look- 
ing forward to the triumph of the Sovereign Individual. 

Some of the shrewdest observers of the mid-twentieth century became 
convinced on the evidence of the day that the tendency of the nation-state to 
centralize power would lead to totalitarian domination over all aspects of 
life. In George Orwell’s 1984 (1949), Big Brother was watching the individ- 
ual vainly struggle to maintain a margin of autonomy and self-respect. It 
appeared to be a losing cause. Friedrich von Hayek’s The Road to Serfdom 
(1944) took a more scholarly view in arguing that freedom was being lost to 
a new form of economic control that left the state as the master of every- 
thing. These works were written before the advent of microprocessing, which 
has incubated a whole range of technologies that enhance the capacity of 
small groups and even individuals to function independently of central au- 
thority. 

As shrewd as observers like Hayek and Orwell were, they were unduly 
pessimistic. History has unfolded its surprises. Totalitarian Communism 
barely outlasted the year 1984. A new form of serfdom may yet emerge in 
the next millennium if governments succeed in suppressing the liberating 
aspects of microtechnology. But it is far more likely that we will see unprece- 
dented opportunity and autonomy for the individual. What our parents wor- 
ried about may prove to be no problem at all. What they took for granted as 
fixed and permanent features of social life now seem destined to disappear. 
Wherever necessity sets boundaries to human choice, we adjust, and reorga- 
nize our lives accordingly. 


The Hazards of Forecasting 


No doubt we put our small measure of dignity at risk in attempting to foresee 
and explain profound changes in the organization of life and the culture that 


The Transition of the Year 2000 41 


binds it together. Most forecasts are doomed to make silly reading in the 
fullness of time. And the more dramatic the change they envision, the more 
embarrassingly wrong they tend to be. The world doesn’t end. The ozone 
doesn’t vanish. The coming Ice Age dissolves into global warming. Notwith- 
standing all the alarms to the contrary, there is still oil in the tank. Mr. 
Antrobus, the everyman of The Skin of Our Teeth, avoids freezing, survives 
wars and threatened economic calamities, and grows old ignoring the studied 
alarms of experts. 

Most attempts to “unveil” the future soon turn out to be comic. Even 
where self-interest provides a strong incentive to clear thinking, forward 
vision is often myopic. In 1903, the Mercedes company said that “there 
would never be as many as | million automobiles worldwide. The reason 
was that it was implausible that as many as | million artisans worldwide 
would be trainable as chauffeurs.” ! 

Recognizing this should stop our mouths. It doesn’t. We are not afraid to 
stand in line for a due share of ridicule. If we mistake matters greatly, 
future generations may laugh as heartily as they please, presuming anyone 
remembers what we said. To dare a thought is to risk being wrong. We are 
hardly so stiff and useless that we are afraid to err. Far from it. We would 
rather venture thoughts that might prove useful to you than suppress them 
out of apprehension that they might prove overblown or embarrassing in 
retrospect. 

As Arthur C. Clarke shrewdly noted, the two overriding reasons why 
attempts to anticipate the future usually fall flat are “Failure of Nerve 
and Failure of Imagination.” '!© Of the two, he wrote, “Failure of Nerve 
seems to be the more common; it occurs when even given all the relevant 
facts the would-be prophet cannot see that they point to an inescap- 
able conclusion. Some of these failures are so ludicrous as to be almost 
unbelievable.” !’ 

Where our exploration of the Information Revolution falls short, as it 
inevitably will, the cause will be due more to a lack of imagination than to a 
lack of nerve. Forecasting the future has always been a bold enterprise, one 
which properly excites skepticism. Perhaps time will prove that our deduc- 
tions are wildly off the mark. Unlike Nostradamus, we do not pretend to be 
prophetic personalities. We do not foretell the future by stirring a wand in a 
bowl of water or by casting horoscopes. Nor do we write in cryptic verse. 
Our purpose is to provide you with a sober, detached analysis of issues that 
could prove to be of great importance to you. 

We feel an obligation to set out our views, even where they seem heretical, 
precisely because they may not otherwise be heard. In the closed mental 
atmosphere of late industrial society, ideas do not traffic as freely as they 
should through the established media. 

This book is written in a constructive spirit. It is the third we have written 


42 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


together, analyzing various stages of the great change now under way. Like 
Blood in the Streets and The Great Reckoning, it is a thought exercise. It 
explores the death of industrial society and its reconfiguration in new forms. 
We expect to see amazing paradoxes in the years to come. On the one hand, 
you will witness the realization of a new form of freedom, with the emer- 
gence of the Sovereign Individual. You can expect to see almost the complete 
liberation of productivity. At the same time, we expect to see the death of 
the modern nation-state. Many of the assurances of equality that Western 
people have grown to take for granted in the twentieth century are destined 
to die with it. We expect that representative democracy as it is now known 
will fade away, to be replaced by the new democracy of choice in the 
cybermarketplace. If our deductions are correct, the politics of the next 
century will be much more varied and less important than that to which we 
have become accustomed. 

We are confident that our argument will be easy to follow, notwithstanding 
the fact that it leads through some territory that is the intellectual equivalent 
of the backwoods and bad neighborhoods. If our meaning is not entirely 
intelligible in places, that is not because we are being cute, or using the 
time-honored equivocation of those who pretend to foretell the future by 
making cryptic pronouncements. We are not equivocators. If our arguments 
are unclear, it is because we have failed the task of writing in a way that 
makes compelling ideas accessible. Unlike many forecasters, we want you 
to understand and even duplicate our line of thinking. It is based not upon 
psychic reveries or the gyrations of planets, but upon old-fashioned, ugly 
logic. For quite logical reasons, we believe that microprocessing will inevita- 
bly subvert and destroy the nation-state, creating new forms of social organi- 
zation in the process. It is both necessary and possible for you to foresee at 
least some details of the new way of life that may be here sooner than you 
think. 


Tronies of a Future Foretold 


For centuries, the end of this millennium has been seen as a pregnant mo- 
ment in history. More than 850 years ago, St. Malachy fixed 2000 as the 
date of the Last Judgment. American psychic Edgar Cayce said in 1934 that 
the earth would shift on its axis in the year 2000, causing California to split 
in two and inundating New York City and Japan. A Japanese rocket scientist, 
Hideo Itokawa, announced in 1980 that the alignment of the planets in a 
“Grand Cross” on August 18, 1999, would cause widespread environmental 
devastation, leading to the end of human life on earth.'® 

Such visions of apocalypse make a plump target for ridicule. After all, the 
year 2000, while an imposing round number, would appear to be only an 


The Transition of the Year 2000 43 


arbitrary artifact of the Christian calendar as adopted in the West. Other 
calendars and dating systems calculate centuries and millennia from differ- 
ent starting points. By the reckoning of the Islamic calendar, for example, 
A.D. 2000 will be the year 1378. As ordinary-sounding as a year can be. 
According to the Chinese calendar, which repeats itself every sixty years, 
A.D. 2000 is just another year of the dragon. It is part of a continuous cycle 
that extends millennia into the past. Yet there is more than theological 
investment in the year 2000. Its importance is undergirded not only by 
Christian tradition, but by the limitations of mid-century information tech- 
nology. The so-called Y2K or year 2000 computer problem, a potentially 
devastating logic flaw in billions of lines of computer code, could approxi- 
mate apocalyptic conditions by closing down essential elements of industrial 
society on the millennial midnight. Many computers and microprocessors 
use software preserved and recycled from the earliest days of computers, 
when memory space, at $600,000 per megabyte, was more valuable than 
gold. To save expensive space, the early programmers tracked dates with 
only the last two numbers of the year. This convention of employing two- 
digit date fields was carried over into most software employed in mainframe 
computers, and even found wide use in personal computers and so-called 
embedded chips, microprocessors that are used to control almost everything, 
from VCRs to car ignition systems, security systems, telephones, the switch- 
ing systems that control the telephone network, process and control systems 
in factories, power plants, oil refineries, chemical plants, pipelines and much 
more. Thus, abbreviated into a two-digit field, the year 1999 would be “99.” 
The trouble is what happens when 00 comes up for the year 2000. Many 
computers will read this as 1900. This may make it impossible for many 
unremediated computers and other digital devices to recognize the year 2000 
in date fields. 

The result will be a massive problem of data corruption that will provide 
an accidental illustration of a new potential for information warfare. In 
the Information Age, potential adversaries will be able to wreak havoc by 
detonating “logic bombs” that sabotage the functions of essential systems 
by corrupting the data upon which their functioning depends. As a military 
exercise, for example, you would not need to shoot down an airplane, if you 
could corrupt data crucial to its safe operation. Data corruption can do 
almost as much as physical weapons can to thwart the function of a modern 
society. That this has potentially far-reaching consequences should be obvi- 
ous on reflection. For example, the Mail of London reported on December 
14, 1997, that airlines around the globe were planning to cancel hundreds of 
flights on January 1, 2000 out of fear that air traffic control systems could 
fail.'? Potential problems include not only the air traffic systems, but also 
date-sensitive functions built into the airplanes themselves. According to 


44 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Boeing, many airplanes will require Y2K remediation. Many devices may 
have a problem if they try to log an event on an invalid date. The fly-by-wire 
computer-controlled systems that operate airplanes may malfunction if they 
are programmed to conclude that crucial maintenance was last performed in 
the year 1900. They many even go into an error loop and shut down. 

The potentially lethal feedback effects of a logic time bomb that closes 
down noncompliant control systems could make the turn of the millennium 
a memorable date for unpleasant reasons. Remember, you can be affected 
by many devices that go into an error loop and shut down even if you 
are lucky enough not to find yourself in midair when the new millennium 
begins. 

You would be well advised to avoid an accident arising from non-Y2K- 
compliant pacemakers, or simply inebriated millennial revelers, because if 
the pacemakers shut down, the phone system might also, so the ambulance 
might never come. Unless you live in Brazil or Ukraine, you are used to 
picking up the telephone or turning on the car phone and automatically 
getting a dial tone. Happily, you seldom have to concern yourself with the 
technical details of how the telephone system operates. But it turns out 
that phone network switches and routers are highly date dependent. All 
connections are logged to a date and time, which 1s crucial to calculating 
call duration for billing. If you happen to make a one-minute call at 11:59:30 
on December 31, 1999, and at 12:00:00 the system reads your call as having 
had a negative duration of more than 99 years, error loops and shutdown are 
possible. While long-distance companies are spending great sums to upgrade 
their switches to make them year 2000 compliant, and local service providers 
presumably are too, if even a few smaller companies fail to comply and go 
down, the whole network could be affected. You will be lucky to get a dial 
tone on January 1, 2000. 

In the words of the Y2K expert Peter de Jager, “If we lose the ability to 
make a phone call, then we lose everything. We lose electronic fund trans- 
fers, we lose trading, we lose branch banking.” And the follow-on conse- 
quences of Y2K failures could come to more than that. 

Today, no one knows how pervasively crucial systems will crash because 
of the year 2000 problem. Embedded systems that cannot be reprogrammed 
but must be replaced if nonfunctional on a date-sensitive basis are found in 
cars, trucks, and buses built after 1976. (Perhaps you won’t be in an accident 
with vehicles driven by persons with noncompliant pacemakers, because 
their vehicles might not start.) Embedded systems are also widespread in all 
types of power plants, water and sewage systems, medical devices, military 
equipment, aircraft, offshore oil platforms, oil tankers, alarm systems, and 
elevators. While many assemblies of microprocessors perform no date- 
sensitive functions, they may nonetheless depend upon a clock, which may 
be Y2K sensitive, for their internal operations. 


The Transition of the Year 2000 45 


MAINFRAMES AND THE Y2K TIME BOMB 


The large-scale command and control systems of government and major 
corporations that involve high transaction volumes on mainframe computers 
were the original focus of Y2K concern. Because they operate on big ma- 
chines for which most software is decades old and mostly noncompliant, the 
original alarms about Y2K, first sounded by Peter de Jager early in the 
1990s, have focused mainly on the need to upgrade operating systems for 
big, multiprocessing mainframes. Mr. de Jager voiced concern that there 
might not be enough programmers conversant with COBOL, the old main- 
frame language, to complete the necessary patches and repairs to date- 
sensitive code, even if every company and government agency with a 
vulnerable system had begun a crash program several years ago. Since this 
has not happened, and many operators of date-sensitive information systems 
have only just begun to assess their vulnerability, you can predict with a 
high degree of confidence that many mainframe systems will not be prepared 
to operate smoothly into the year 2000. 

This is certainly a major concern because there is really no alternative to 
computer processing as the economy is now structured. Most businesses that 
are large enough to require a mainframe to handle their transactions are 
dependent upon transaction volumes that could not be managed with old- 
fashioned nineteenth-century paperwork systems. If such businesses were 
forced to revert to shuffling paper they could expect to complete only a 
fraction of their normal transaction volume. The revenue shock from such a 
drop-off in business would endanger the survival of all but the most highly 
capitalized companies. 

Almost everything related to money—invoicing, purchasing, and payroll 
systems, plus inventory controls and regulatory compliance—would be 
fouled up. Huge quantities of data would be lost as computers crash or spew 
out false data in response to the Y2K problem. In some cases, it would 
actually prove a blessing if systems crash immediately rather than corrupting 
their data on a compounding basis until massive malfunction draws attention 
to the problem. What happens to files when a backup utility copies files 
originating on 07/04/99 to an update on 01/04/00? Who knows? Will the 
computer interpret a payment made on January 4, “1900,” for an insurance 
policy as a signal that the policy has been in default for a century, resulting 
in a canceled policy that is stricken from the file? Will banks and finance 
company computers seek to assess a hundred years of interest on loans that 
span the shift to the new millennium? Will your banks and brokerage firms 
retain accurate records of your account balances and give you timely access 
to your funds? These are just some of the interesting quandaries that you 
will confront because of the Y2K problem. 


46 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


“This is potentially the most destructive part of the year 2000 problem. This 
isn't the inconvenience part where your paycheck comes a few days late. This 
is the blood-in-the-streets part.” 


—Dr. LEON KAPPELMAN, CO-CHAIR, 
SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION MANAGEMENT’S YEAR 2000 WoRKING GROUP 


Also high on your list of concerns should be what happens if the electric- 
ity goes off because of Y2K-related malfunctions. Without electricity, even 
most systems that are not Y2K-impaired will not function: your refrigerator, 
your freezer, perhaps even your source of heat. Y2K compliance issues 
could effect safety-related access and control functions at nuclear power 
plants. For example, personnel at nuclear facilities wear dosimetry devices 
that measure the amount of radiation exposure they receive while in the 
plant. These devices are analyzed regularly, with the data on exposure 
amounts maintained on a computer system that controls personnel access to 
the facility. Obviously, if the controlling computers fail, they will make a 
hash of all the elaborate controls designed to insure safe operation and 
guarantee proper maintenance. But, more importantly, a Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission memo notes that many “non-safety-related, but important 
computer-based systems, primarily databases and data collection necessary 
for plant operations,” are date sensitive. 

The conventional generating plants are not less vulnerable to Y2K disrup- 
tion. For one thing, coal-powered plants are susceptible to disruptions in the 
surface transportation system that brings the coal to the boilers. In the 1997— 
1998 winter heating season, operators of coal-fired electricity generation 
found themselves forced to reduce output in some instances because of a 
slowdown in rail deliveries of Western coal arising from the merger of the 
Southern Pacific and Union Pacific railway systems. The problem arose 
because of incompatibilities between the computer control and dispatch 
systems employed by the two railroads. According to a Union Pacific 
spokesman, integrating the two systems became a “nightmare,” in spite of 
the fact that Union Pacific Technologies has been considered an industry 
leader in developing computerized transportation control systems. As a re- 
sult of the programming difficulties, the railroad was unable to accurately 
track the movements of its freight cars. The failure of Union Pacific to 
master the assimilation of Southern Pacific is a bad omen about what could 
happen when Y2K logic time bombs disrupt transportation, power genera- 
tion, and other aspects of the economy. 

The biggest worry about the electric grid, however, arises from the fact 
that the whole system is subject to sensitive monitoring and computer con- 


The Transition of the Year 2000 47 


trol to transfer electricity from areas of surplus generation to those with a 
deficit. This process must be carefully monitored by computer to prevent 
power surges and system failures. All the transfers of electricity are logged 
to time and date for duration, much like a telephone connection. While 
heavy-duty mechanical relays are used to make the connections, they are 
controlled by computer systems. These computer controls, essential for load 
balancing, may fail for the same reasons as the phone networks. In fact, the 
power load distribution-control systems in North America are networked 
together through T-1 lines and telephone microwave links. So if the phone 
network fails, you can expect the electricity to go down as well. And remem- 
ber, as the experience in Canada in January 1998 confirms, once the electric- 
ity shuts down over a wide area, getting the system running again is a 
challenge. A blackout may last for an inconveniently long time. 


Y2K AND THE NUCLEAR ARSENAL 


For modern economies to have the electricity turn off in the dead of winter 
would be disruptive and potentially health threatening, especially for those 
who depend upon electric heat and medical equipment. Yet the worst case 
scenario 1s even worse. According to John Koskinen, who heads President 
Clinton’s Y2K Conversion Council, U.S. military arsenals may cease to 
function on the stroke of midnight, December 31, 1999. While indicating 
that he does not wish to touch off undue alarm, Koskinen adds, “It needs to 
be worried about.” One concern about nuclear missiles “is if the data doesn’t 
function and they actually go off.” 

Of course, this concern would apply with equal or greater force to Russian 
nuclear missiles. Russia’s bankruptcy has made upgrades for Y2K compli- 
ance even more problematic than in the United States. And there is evidence 
that Russia is not yet taking Y2K conversion seriously. While one would 
pray that no accidental launches would occur, there should be little doubt 
that the turn of the year 2000 has a potential for aggravating global insecurity 
if for no other reason than that military communications systems in many 
countries may not function normally. As Koskinen puts it, “If you’re sitting 
in a country and suddenly you can’t quite figure out exactly what’s happen- 
ing, and your communications don’t work as well, you get even more ner- 
vous.” So put that on your list of Y2K worries. The logic time bomb could 
precipitate the launch of genuinely explosive bombs—a fact that highlights 
the danger from information warfare to centralized command and control 
systems. 

If terrorists wish to strike any centralized system, they may pick Decem- 
ber 31, 1999, as the date for action because it will be a time of maximum 


48 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


vulnerability of many systems. Not only will communications be strained at 
best, with the possibility that electricity may fail, vehicles may not start, 
police, fire, and ambulance 911 service may not work, and so on, but many 
other functions you probably take for granted, such as air traffic control, may 
cease to function. No power means no water from the tap. Sewage systems 
would fail. Traffic lights could turn off. Within a few hours of a genuine 
breakdown in the transportation system, food in grocery stores would be 
shopped out. (Or looted.) On the basis of recent experience in American 
cities, you could suppose that no power, no water, no heat for many, no light, 
and fragmented communications with emergency services, including police 
and fire, all add up to no civilization. While no one can be sure what the 
impact of the Y2K problem may be, it could extend to looting and rioting in 
the streets, especially if it becomes known that there could be widespread 
failures to issue payroll, welfare and pension checks. 


“We shall not be what we have been, but we shall begin to be other.’ 


— JOACHIM DE FIORE 


Premonitions of doom about the new millennium do not necessarily rest 
upon theology tied to the Christian faith, but they do fit within the millennial 
tradition of Joachim de Fiore whose mediations convinced him that Christ 
was only “the second hinge of history” and that another was destined to 
unfold.” 2! So argues the philosopher Michael Grosso, who suggests that the 
Information Revolution is piloting human history toward the realization of 
the prophetic vision of the Western world. He calls this “technocalypse.” 
Whether or not the development of technology is somehow informed by 
millennial visions, the Y2K phenomenon is an artifact of the predominant 
Western imagination of time. In a strange way, it could complement dreams, 
reveries and visions, or numerical interpretations of visions, like Newton’s 
gloss on the prophecies of Daniel. These intuitive leaps begin with a perspec- 
tive that takes the birth of Christ to be the central fact of history. They are 
compounded by the psychological power of large round numbers, which 
every trader will recognize as having an arresting quality. The two thou- 
sandth year of our epoch cannot help but become a focus for the imagination 
of intuitive people. 

A critic could easily make these premonitions seem silly, without even 
addressing the ambiguous and debatable theological notions of the Apoca- 
lypse and the Last Judgment that give these visions so much of their power. 
Interestingly, however, the Y2K computer glitch trumps the errors of arith- 


The Transition of the Year 2000 49 


metic that otherwise might seem to devalue the importance of the year 2000 
even within the Christian framework. The year 2000 has the potential to 
become an inflection point for the next stage of history simply because it 
brings forward the arrival of the new millennium. In strict logic, the next 
millennium will not begin until 2001. The year 2000 will be only the last 
year of the twentieth century, the two thousandth year since Christ’s birth. 
Or it would be had Christ been born in the first year of the Christian era. He 
was not. In 533, when Christ’s birth replaced the founding date of Rome as 
the basis for calculating years according to the Western calendar, the monks 
who introduced the new convention miscalculated Christ’s birth. It is now 
accepted that he was born in 4 B.c. On that basis, a full two thousand 
years since his birth were completed sometime in 1997. Hence Carl Jung’s 
apparently odd launch date for the start of a New Age. 

Giggle if you will, but we do not despise or dismiss intuitive understand- 
ings of history. Although our argument is grounded in logic, not in reveries, 
we are awed by the prophetic power of human consciousness. Time after 
time, it redeems the visions of madmen, psychics, and saints. So it may be 
with the transformation of the year 2000. The date that has long been fixed 
in the imagination of the West looks to be the inflection point that at least 
half confirms that history has a destiny. We cannot explain why this should 
be, but nonetheless we are convinced that it is so. 

Our intuition is that history has a destiny, and that free will and determin- 
ism are two versions of the same phenomenon. The human interactions that 
form history behave as though they were informed by a kind of destiny. Just 
as an electron plasma, a dense gas of electrons, behaves as a complex 
system, so do human beings. The freedom of individual movement by the 
electrons turns out to be compatible with highly organized collective behav- 
ior. As David Bohm said of an electron plasma, human history is “a highly 
organized system which behaves as a whole.” 

Understanding the way the world works means developing a realistic 
intuition of the way that human society obeys the mathematics of natural 
processes. Reality is nonlinear. But most people’s expectations are not. To 
understand the dynamics of change, you have to recognize that human soci- 
ety, like other complex systems in nature, is characterized by cycles and 
discontinuities. That means certain features of history have a tendency to 
repeat themselves, and the most important changes, when they occur, may 
be abrupt rather than gradual. 

Among the cycles that permeate human life, a mysterious five-hundred- 
year cycle appears to mark major turning points in the history of Western 
civilization. As the year 2000 approaches, we are haunted by the strange fact 
that the final decade of each century divisible by five has marked a profound 
transition in Western civilization, a pattern of death and rebirth that marks 


50 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


new phases of social organization in much the way that death and birth 
delineate the cycle of human generations. This has been true since at least 
500 B.c., when Greek democracy emerged with the constitutional reforms of 
Cleisthenes in 508 B.c. The following five centuries were a period of growth 
and intensification of the ancient economy, culminating in the birth of Christ 
in 4 B.c. This was also the time of the greatest prosperity of the ancient 
economy, when interest rates reached their lowest level prior to the modern 
period. 

The next five centuries saw a gradual winding down of prosperity, leading 
to the collapse of the Roman Empire late in the fifth century A.D. William 
Playfair’s summary is worth repeating: “When Rome was at its highest pitch 
of greatness .. . will be seen to be at the birth of Christ, that is, during the 
reign of Augustus, and by the same means it will be found declining gradu- 
ally till the year 490.” ?? It was then that the last legions dissolved, and the 
Western world sank into the Dark Ages. 

During the following five centuries, the economy withered, long-distance 
trade ground to a halt, cities were depopulated, money vanished from circu- 
lation, and art and literacy almost disappeared. The disappearance of effec- 
tive law with the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West led to the 
emergence of more primitive arrangements for settling disputes. The blood 
feud began to be significant at the end of the fifth century. The first recorded 
incident of trial by ordeal occurred precisely in the year 500. 

Once again, a thousand years ago, the final decade of the tenth century 
witnessed another “tremendous upheaval in social and economic systems.” 
Perhaps the least known of these transitions, the feudal revolution, began at 
a time of utter economic and political turmoil. In The Transformation of the 
Year One Thousand, Guy Bois, a professor of medieval history at the Univer- 
sity of Paris, claims that this rupture at the end of the tenth century involved 
the complete collapse of the remnants of ancient institutions, and the emer- 
gence of something new out of the anarchy—feudalism.” In the words of 
Raoul Glaber, “It was said that the whole world, with one accord, shook off 
the tatters of antiquity.” ** The new system that suddenly emerged accommo- 
dated the slow revival of economic growth. The five centuries now known 
as the Middle Ages saw a rebirth of money and international trade, along 
with the rediscovery of arithmetic, literacy, and time awareness. 

Then, in the final decade of the fifteenth century, there was yet another 
turning point. It was then that Europe emerged from the demographic deficit 
caused by the Black Death and almost immediately began to assert dominion 
over the rest of the globe. The “Gunpowder Revolution,” the “Renaissance,” 
and the “Reformation” are names given to different aspects of this transition 
that ushered in the Modern Age. It was announced with a bang when Charles 
VIII invaded Italy with new bronze cannon. It involved an opening to the 


The Transition of the Year 2000 51 


world, epitomized by Columbus sailing to America in 1492. This opening to 
the New World launched a push toward the most dramatic economic growth 
in the experience of humanity. It involved a transformation of physics and 
astronomy that led to the creation of modern science. And its ideas were 
disseminated widely with the new technology of the printing press. 

Now we sit at the threshold of another millennial transformation. The 
large command and control systems inherited from the Industrial Era may 
break down like the one-horse shay on the stroke of the millennial midnight. 
Yet whether or not the Y2K logic bomb precipitates an immediate collapse 
of industrial society, its days are numbered. We expect the advent of the 
Information Society to utterly transform the world, in ways that this book is 
meant to explain. You would be perfectly within your rights to doubt this, 
since no cycle that repeats itself only twice in a millennium has demon- 
strated enough iterations to be statistically significant. Indeed, even much 
shorter cycles have been viewed skeptically by economists demanding more 
statistically satisfying proof. “Professor Dennis Robertson once wrote that 
we had better wait a few centuries before being sure” about the existence of 
four-year and eight- to ten-year trade cycles.*> By that standard, Professor 
Robertson would have to suspend judgment for about thirty thousand years 
to be sure that the five-hundred-year cycle is not a statistical fluke. We are 
less dogmatic, or more willing to take a hint. We recognize that the patterns 
of reality are more complex than the static- and linear-equilibrium models 
of most economists. 

We believe that the coming of the year 2000 marks more than another 
convenient division along an endless continuum of time. We believe it will 
be an inflection point between the Old World and a New World to come. 
The Industrial Age is rapidly passing, and its demise may, ironically, be 
accelerated by the fact that early computer memory was so expensive that it 
encouraged the widespread adoption of two-digit date fields. When Hallerith 
punch cards could accommodate only eighty characters each, abbreviating 
dates seemed a prudent thing to do. Contrary to the expectations of the early 
programmers, however, their abbreviation of the date field endured four 
decades until the end of the millennium as an accidental logic bomb that 
could destroy a large part of Industrial society. The U.S. government’s Office 
of Management and Budget described the problem in “Getting Federal Com- 
puters Ready for 2000,” a report dated February 7, 1997. The OMB con- 
cludes of computers: “Unless they are fixed or replaced, they will fail at the 
turn of the century in one of three ways: they will reject legitimate entries, 
or they will compute erroneous results, or they simply will not run.” These 
three outcomes in combination could cripple Industrial society. Its technol- 
ogy of mass production is destined to be eclipsed by a new technology of 
miniaturization in any event. A near-term crisis will merely accelerate the 


52 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


process. With the new information technology has come a new science of 
nonlinear dynamics, one whose startling conclusions are mere strands that 
have yet to be woven together into a comprehensive worldview. We live in 
the time of the computer, but our dreams are still spun on the loom. We 
continue to live by the metaphors and thoughts of industrialism. We don’t 
yet imagine the world in terms of strange attractors. Our politics still strad- 
dles the industrial divide between right and left, as mapped by thinkers like 
Adam Smith and Karl Marx, who died before almost everyone now living 
was born.* The industrial worldview, incorporating the operating principles 
of industrial science, is still the “commonsense” intuition of educated opin- 
ion. It is our thesis that the “common sense” of the Industrial Age will no 
longer apply to many areas as the world is transformed. 

More than eighty-five years after the day in 1911 when Oswald Spengler 
was seized with an intuition of a coming world war and “the decline of the 
West,” we, too, see “a historical change of phase occurring . . . at the point 
preordained for it hundreds of years ago.” Like Spengler, we see the 
impending death of Western civilization, and with it the collapse of the 
world order that has predominated these past five centuries, ever since Co- 
lumbus sailed west to open contact with the New World. Yet unlike Spengler 
we see the birth of a new stage in Western civilization in the coming millen- 
nium. 


* Adam Smith died in 1790, Karl Marx in 1883. 


CHAPTER ¢ 


MEGAPULTTICAL 
TRANSFURMA TIONG 
IN Ho TORIC 
PEROPECTIVE 


“In history, as in nature, birth and death are equally balanced.”' 
— JOHAN HUIZINGA 


THE WANING OF THE MODERN WORLD 


In our view, you are witnessing nothing less than the waning of the Modern 
Age. It is a development driven by a ruthless but hidden logic. More than 
we commonly understand, more than CNN and the newspapers tell us, the 
next millennium will no longer be “modern.” We say this not to imply that 
you face a savage or backward future, although that is possible, but to 
emphasize that the stage of history now opening will be qualitatively differ- 
ent from that into which you were born. 

Something new is coming. Just as farming societies differed in kind from 
hunting-and-gathering bands, and industrial societies differed radically from 
feudal or yeoman agricultural systems, so the New World to come will mark 
a radical departure from anything seen before. 

In the new millennium, economic and political life will no longer be 
organized on a gigantic scale under the domination of the nation-state as it 
was during the modern centuries. The civilization that brought you world 
war, the assembly line, social security, income tax, deodorant, and the toaster 
oven is dying. Deodorant and the toaster oven may survive. The others won’t. 


S54 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Like an ancient and once mighty man, the nation-state has a future numbered 
in years and days, and no longer in centuries and decades. 

Governments have already lost much of their power to regulate and com- 
pel. The collapse of Communism marked the end of a long cycle of five 
centuries during which magnitude of power overwhelmed efficiency in the 
organization of government. It was a time when the returns to violence were 
high and rising. They no longer are. A phase transition of world-historic 
dimensions has already begun. Indeed, the future Gibbon who chronicles the 
decline and fall of the once—Modern Age in the next millennium may 
declare that it had already ended by the time you read this book. Looking 
back, he may say, as we do, that it ended with the fall of the Berlin Wall in 
1989. Or with the death of the Soviet Union in 1991. Either date could come 
to stand as a defining event in the evolution of civilization, the end of what 
we now know as the Modern Age. 

The fourth stage of human development is coming, and perhaps its least 
predictable feature is the new name under which it will be known. Call it 
“Post-Modern.” Call it the “Cyber Society” or the “Information Age.” Or 
make up your own name. No one knows what conceptual glue will stick a 
nickname to the next phase of history. 

We do not even know that the five-hundred-year stretch of history just 
ending will continue to be thought of as “modern.” If future historians know 
anything about word derivations, it will not be. A more descriptive title 
might be “The Age of the State” or “The Age of Violence.” But such a 
name would fall outside the temporal spectrum that currently defines the 
epochs of history. “Modern,” according to the Oxford English Dictionary, 
means “pertaining to the present and recent times, as distinguished from the 
remote past....In historical use commonly applied (in contradiction to 
ancient and medieval) to the time subsequent to the MIDDLE AGES.” 2 

Western people consciously thought of themselves as “modern” only 
when they came to understand that the medieval period was over. Before 
1500, no one had ever thought of the feudal centuries as a “middle” period 
in Western civilization. The reason is obvious upon reflection: before an age 
can reasonably be seen as sandwiched in the “middle” of two other historic 
epochs, it must have already come to an end. Those living during the feudal 
centuries could not have imagined themselves as living in a halfway house 
between antiquity and modern civilization until it dawned on them not just 
that the medieval period was over, but also that medieval civilization differed 
dramatically from that of the Dark Ages or antiquity. 

Human cultures have blind spots. We have no vocabulary to describe 
paradigm changes in the largest boundaries of life, especially those happen- 
ing around us. Notwithstanding the many dramatic changes that have un- 
folded since the time of Moses, only a few heretics have bothered to think 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 55 


about how the transitions from one phase of civilization to another actually 
unfold. 

How are they triggered? What do they have in common? What patterns 
can help you tell when they begin and know when they are over? When will 
Great Britain or the United States come to an end? These are questions for 
which you would be hard-pressed to find conventional answers. 


The Taboo on Foresight 


To see “outside” an existing system is like being a stagehand trying to force 
a dialogue with a character in a play. It breaches a convention that helps 
keep the system functioning. Every social order incorporates among its key 
taboos the notion that people living in it should not think about how it will 
end and what rules may prevail in the new system that takes its place. 
Implicitly, whatever system exists is the last or the only system that will ever 
exist. Not that this is so baldly stated. Few who have ever read a history 
book would find such an assumption realistic if it was articulated. Nonethe- 
less, that is the convention that rules the world. Every social system, however 
strongly or weakly it clings to power, pretends that its rules will never be 
superseded. They are the last word. Or perhaps the only word. Primitives 
assume that theirs is the only possible way of organizing life. More economi- 
cally complicated systems that incorporate a sense of history usually place 
themselves at its apex. Whether they are Chinese mandarins in the court of 
the emperor, the Marxist nomenklatura in Stalin’s Kremlin, or members of 
the House of Representatives in Washington, the powers-that-be either imag- 
ine no history at all or place themselves at the pinnacle of history, in a 
superior position compared to everyone who came before, and the vanguard 
of anything to come. 

This is true for practical reasons. The more apparent it is that a system is 
nearing an end, the more reluctant people will be to adhere to its laws. Any 
social organization will therefore tend to discourage or play down analyses 
that anticipate its demise. This alone helps ensure that history’s great transi- 
tions are seldom spotted as they happen. If you know nothing else about the 
future, you can rest assured that dramatic changes will be neither welcomed 
nor advertised by conventional thinkers. 

You cannot depend upon conventional information sources to give you an 
objective and timely warning about how the world is changing and why. If 
you wish to understand the great transition now under way, you have little 
choice but to figure it out for yourself. 


56 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Beyond the Obvious 


This means looking beyond the obvious. The record shows that even transi- 
tions that are undeniably real in retrospect may not be acknowledged for 
decades or even centuries after they happen. Consider the fall of Rome. It 
was probably the most important historic development in the first millen- 
nium of the Christian era. Yet long after Rome’s demise, the fiction that it 
survived was held out to public view, like Lenin’s embalmed corpse. No one 
who depended upon the pretenses of officials for his understanding of the 
“news” would have learned that Rome had fallen until long after that infor- 
mation ceased to matter. 

The reason was not merely the inadequacy of communications in the 
ancient world. The outcome would have been much the same had CNN 
miraculously been in business, running its videotape in September 476. That 
is when the last Roman emperor in the West, Romulus Augustulus, was 
captured in Ravenna and forcibly retired to a villa in Campania on a pension. 
Even if Wolfe Blitzer had been there with minicams recording the news in 
476, it is unlikely that he or anyone else would have dared to characterize 
those events as marking the end of the Roman Empire. That, of course, is 
exactly what latter historians said happened. 

CNN editors probably would not have approved a headline story saying 
“Rome fell this evening.” The powers-that-be denied that Rome had fallen. 
Peddlers of “news” seldom are partisans of controversy in ways that would 
undermine their own profits. They may be partisan. They may even be 
outrageously so. But they seldom report conclusions that would convince 
subscribers to cancel their subscriptions and head for the hills. Which is why 
few would have reported the fall of Rome even if it had been technologically 
possible. Experts would have come forth to say that it was ridiculous to 
speak of Rome falling. To have said otherwise would have been bad for 
business and, perhaps, bad for the health of those doing the reporting. The 
powers -in late-fifth-century Rome were barbarians, and they denied that 
Rome had fallen. 

But it was not merely a case of authorities’ saying, “Don’t report this or 
we will kill you.” Part of the problem was that Rome was already so degener- 
ate by the later decades of the fifth century that its “fall” genuinely eluded 
the notice of most people who lived through it. In fact, it was a generation 
later before Count Marcellinus first suggested that “The Western Roman 
Empire perished with this Augustulus.”* Many more decades passed, per- 
haps centuries, before there was a common acknowledgment that the Roman 
Empire in the West no longer existed. Certainly Charlemagne believed that 
he was a legitimate Roman emperor in the year 800. 

The point is not that Charlemagne and all who thought in conventional 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 57 


terms about the Roman Empire after 476 were fools. To the contrary. The 
characterization of social developments is frequently ambiguous. When the 
power of predominant institutions is brought into the bargain to reinforce a 
convenient conclusion, even one based largely on pretense, only someone of 
strong character and strong opinions would dare contradict it. If you try to 
put yourself in the position of a Roman of the late fifth century, it is easy to 
imagine how tempting it would have been to conclude that nothing had 
changed. That certainly was the optimistic conclusion. To have thought 
otherwise might have been frightening. And why come to a frightening 
conclusion when a reassuring one was at hand? 

After all, a case could have been made that business would continue as 
usual. It had in the past. The Roman army, and particularly the frontier 
garrisons, had been barbarized for centuries.* By the third century, it had 
become regular practice for the army to proclaim a new emperor. By the 
fourth century, even officers were Germanized and frequently illiterate.° 
There had been many violent overthrows of emperors before Romulus Au- 
gustulus was removed from the throne. His departure might have seemed no 
different to his contemporaries than many other upheavals in a chaotic time. 
And he was sent packing with a pension. The very fact that he received a 
pension, even for a brief period before he was murdered, was a reassurance 
that the system survived. To an optimist, Odoacer, who deposed Romulus 
Augustulus, reunified rather than destroyed the empire. A son of Attila’s 
sidekick Edecon, Odoacer was a clever man. He did not proclaim himself 
emperor. Instead, he convened the Senate and prevailed upon its too- 
suggestible members that they offer the emperorship and thus sovereignty 
over the whole empire to Zeno, the Eastern emperor in faraway Byzantium. 
Odoacer was merely to be Zeno’s patricius to govern Italy. 

As Will Durant wrote in The Story of Civilization, these changes did not 
appear to be the “fall of Rome” but merely “negligible shifts on the surface 
of the national scene.” ’? When Rome fell, Odoacer said that Rome endured. 
He, along with almost everyone else, was keen to pretend that nothing had 
changed. They knew that “the glory that was Rome” was far better than the 
barbarism that was taking its place. Even the barbarians thought so. As 
C. W. Previte-Orton wrote in The Shorter Cambridge Medieval History, the 
end of the fifth century, when “the Emperors had been replaced by barbaric 
German kings,” was a time of “persistent make-believe.” ® 


“Persistent Make-Believe” 


This “make-believe” involved the preservation of the facade of the old 
system, even as its essence was “deformed by barbarism.” ° The old forms 
of government remained the same when the last emperor was replaced by a 


58 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


barbarian “lieutenant.” The Senate still met. “The praetorian prefecture and 
other high offices continued, and were held by eminent Romans.” '® Consuls 
were still nominated for a year. “The Roman civil administration survived 
intact.” !! Indeed, in some ways it remained intact until the birth of feudalism 
at the end of the tenth century. On public occasions, the old imperial insignia 
was still employed. Christianity was still the state religion. The barbarians 
still pretended to owe fealty to the Eastern emperor in Constantinople, and 
to the traditions of Roman law. In fact, in Durant’s words, “in the West the 
great Empire was no more.” 


So What? 


The faraway example of the fall of Rome is relevant for a number of reasons 
as you contemplate conditions in the world today. Most books about the 
future are really books about the present. We have sought to remedy that 
defect by making this book about the future first of all a book about the past. 
We think that you are likely to draw a better perspective about what the 
future has in store if we illustrate important megapolitical points about the 
logic of violence with real examples from the past. History is an amazing 
teacher. The stories it has to tell are more interesting than any we could 
make up. And many of the more interesting relate to the fall of Rome. They 
document important lessons that could be relevant to your future in the 
Information Age. 

First of all, the fall of Rome is one of history’s more vivid examples of 
what happened in a major transition when the scale of government was 
collapsing. The transitions of the year 1000 also involved the collapse of 
central authority, and did so in a way that increased the complexity and 
scope of economic activity. The Gunpowder Revolution at the end of the 
fifteenth century involved major changes in institutions that tended to raise 
rather than shrink the scale of governance. Today, for the first time in a 
thousand years, megapolitical conditions in the West are undermining and 
destroying governments, corporate conglomerates, labor unions, and many 
other institutions that operate on a large scale. 

Of course, the collapse in the scale of governance at the end of the Roman 
Empire had very different causes from those prevailing now, at the advent 
of the Information Age. Part of the reason that Rome fell is simply that it 
had expanded beyond the scale at which the economies of violence could be 
maintained. The cost of garrisoning the empire’s far-flung borders exceeded 
the economic advantages that an ancient agricultural economy could sup- 
port. The burden of taxation and regulation required to finance the military 
effort rose to exceed the carrying capacity of the economy. Corruption 
became endemic. A large part of the effort of military commanders, as 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 59 


historian Ramsay MacMullen has documented, was devoted to pursuit of 
“illicit profits of their command.” This they pursued by shaking down the 
population, what the fourth-century observer Synesius described as “the 
peace-time war, one almost worse than the barbarian war and arising from 
the military’s indiscipline and the officers’ greed.” ' 

Another important contributing factor to Rome’s collapse was a demo- 
graphic deficit caused by the Antonine plagues. The collapse of the Roman 
population in many areas obviously contributed to economic and military 
weakness. Nothing of that kind has happened today, at least not yet. Taking 
a longer view, perhaps, the scourge of new “plagues” will compound the 
challenges of technological devolution in the new millennium. The unprece- 
dented bulge in human population in the twentieth century creates a tempting 
target for rapidly mutating microparasites. Fears about the Ebola virus, or 
something like it, invading metropolitan populations may be well founded. 
But this is not the place to consider the coevolution of humans and diseases. 
As interesting a topic as that is, our argument at this juncture is not about 
why Rome fell, or even about whether the world today is vulnerable to 
some of the same influences that contributed to Roman decline. It is about 
something different—namely, the way that history’s great transformations 
are perceived, or rather, misperceived as they happen. 

People are always and everywhere to some degree conservative, with a 
small “c.” That implies a reluctance to think in terms of dissolving venerable 
social conventions, overturning the accepted institutions, and defying the 
laws and values from which they drew their bearings. Few are inclined to 
imagine that apparently minor changes in climate or technology or some 
other variable can somehow be responsible for severing connections to the 
world of their fathers. The Romans were reluctant to acknowledge the 
changes unfolding around them. So are we. 

Yet recognize it or not, we are living through a change of historical season, 
a transformation in the way people organize their livelihoods and defend 
themselves that is so far-reaching that it will inevitably transform the whole 
of society. The change will be so profound, in fact, that to understand it will 
require taking almost nothing for granted. You will be invited at almost 
every turn to believe that the coming Information Societies will be very like 
the industrial society you grew up in. We doubt it. Microprocessing will 
dissolve the mortar in the bricks. It will so profoundly alter the logic of 
violence that it will inevitably change the way people organize their liveli- 
hoods and defend themselves. Yet the tendency will be to downplay the 
inevitability of these changes, or to argue about their desirability as if it were 
within the fiat of industrial institutions to determine how history evolves. 


60 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


The Grand Illusion 


Authors who are in many ways better informed than we are will nevertheless 
lead you astray in thinking about the future because they are far too superfi- 
cial in examining how societies work. For example, David Kline and Daniel 
Burstein have written a well-researched volume entitled Road Warriors: 
Dreams and Nightmares Along the Information Highway. It is full of admira- 
ble detail, but much of this detail is marshaled in arguing an illusion, the 
idea “that citizens can act together, consciously, to shape the spontaneous 
economic and natural processes going on around them.” '* Although it may 
not be obvious, this is equivalent to saying that feudalism might have sur- 
vived if everyone had rededicated himself to chivalry. No one in a court of 
the late fifteenth century would have objected to such a sentiment. Indeed, it 
would have been heresy to do so. But it also would have been entirely 
misleading, an example of the snake trying to fit the future into its old skin. 

The basic causes of change are precisely those that are not subject to 
conscious control. They are the factors that alter the conditions under which 
violence pays. Indeed, they are so remote from any obvious means of manip- 
ulation that they are not even subjects of political maneuvering in a world 
saturated with politics. No one ever marched in a demonstration shouting, 
“Increase scale economies in the production process.” No banner has ever 
demanded, “Invent a weapons system that increases the importance of the 
infantry.” No candidate ever promised to “alter the balance between effi- 
ciency and magnitude in protection against violence.” Such slogans would 
be ridiculous, precisely because their goals are beyond the capacity of any- 
one to consciously affect. Yet as we will explore, these variables determine 
how the world works to a far greater degree than any political platform. 

If you think about it carefully, it should be obvious that important transi- 
tions in history seldom are driven primarily by human wishes. They do not 
happen because people get fed up with one way of life and suddenly prefer 
another. A moment’s reflection suggests why. If what people think and desire 
were the only determinants of what happens, then all the abrupt changes in 
history would have to be explained by wild mood swings unconnected to 
any change in the actual conditions of life. In fact, this never happens. Only 
in cases of medical problems affecting a few people do we see arbitrary 
fluctuations in mood that appear entirely divorced from any objective cause. 

As a tule, large numbers of people do not suddenly and all at once decide 
to abandon their way of life simply because they find it amusing to do so. 
No forager ever said, “I am tired of living in prehistoric times, I would 
prefer the life of a peasant in a farming village.” Any decisive swing in 
patterns of behavior and values is invariably a response to an actual change 
in the conditions of life. In this sense, at least, people are always realistic. If 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 61 


their views do change abruptly, it probably indicates that they have been 
confronted by some departure from familiar conditions: an invasion, a 
plague, a sudden climatic shift, or a technological revolution that alters their 
livelihoods or their ability to defend themselves. 

Far from being the product of human desire, decisive historic changes 
more often than not confound the wish of most people for stability. When 
change occurs, it typically causes widespread disorientation, especially 
among those who lose income or social status. You will look in vain at 
public opinion polls or other measures of mood for an understanding of how 
the coming megapolitical transition is likely to unfold. 


LIFE WITHOUT FORESIGHT 


If we fail to perceive the great transition going on around us, it is partly 
because we do not desire to see. Our foraging forebears may have been just 
as obdurate, but they had a better excuse. No one ten thousand years ago 
could have foreseen the consequences of the Agricultural Revolution. In- 
deed, no one could have foreseen much of anything beyond where to find 
the next meal. When farming began, there was no record of past events from 
which to draw perspective on the future. There was not even a Western sense 
of time divided into orderly units, like seconds, minutes, hours, days, and so 
on, to measure out the years. Foragers lived in the “eternal present,” without 
calendars, and indeed, without written records at all. They had no science, 
and no other intellectual apparatus for understanding cause and effect be- 
yond their own intuitions. When it came to looking ahead, our primeval 
ancestors were blind. To cite the biblical metaphor, they had not yet eaten of 
the fruit of knowledge. 


Learning from the Past 


Luckily, we have a better vantage point. The past five hundred generations 
have given us analytic capabilities that our forebears lacked. Science and 
mathematics have helped unlock many of nature’s secrets, giving us an 
understanding of cause and effect that approaches the magical when com- 
pared to that of the early foragers. Computational algorithms developed as a 
result of high-speed computers have shed new insights on the workings 
of complex, dynamic systems like the human economy. The painstaking 
development of political economy itself, although it falls well short of per- 
fection, has honed understanding of the factors informing human action. 
Important among these is the recognition that people at all times and places 
tend to respond to incentives. Not always as mechanically as economists 


62 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


imagine, but they do respond. Costs and rewards matter. Changes in external 
conditions that raise the rewards or lower the costs of certain behavior will 
lead to more of that behavior, other things being equal. 


Incentives Matter 


The fact that people tend to respond to costs and rewards is an essential 
element of forecasting. You can say with a high degree of confidence that if 
you drop a hundred-dollar bill on the street, someone will soon pick it up, 
whether you are in New York, Mexico City, or Moscow. This is not as trivial 
as it seems. It shows why the clever people who say that forecasting is 
impossible are wrong. Any forecast that accurately anticipates the impact of 
incentives on behavior is likely to be broadly correct. And the greater the 
anticipated change in costs and rewards, the less trivial the implied forecast 
is likely to be. 

The most far-reaching forecasts of all are likely to arise from recog- 
nizing the implications of shifting megapolitical variables. Violence is the 
ultimate boundary force on behavior; thus, if you can understand how the 
logic of violence will change, you can usefully predict where people will be 
dropping or picking up the equivalent of one-hundred-dollar bills in the 
future. 

We do not mean by this that you can know the unknowable. We cannot 
tell you how to forecast winning lottery numbers or any truly random event. 
We have no way of knowing when or whether a terrorist will detonate an 
atomic blast in Manhattan. Or if an asteroid will strike Saudi Arabia. We 
cannot predict the coming of a new Ice Age, a sudden volcanic eruption, or 
the emergence of a new disease. The number of unknowable events that 
could alter the course of history is large. But knowing the unknowable is 
very different from drawing out the implications of what is already known. 
If you see a flash of lightning far away, you can forecast with a high degree 
of confidence that a thunderclap is due. Forecasting the consequences of 
megapolitical transitions involves much longer time frames, and less certain 
connections, but it is a similar kind of exercise. 

Megapolitical catalysts for change usually appear well before their conse- 
quences manifest themselves. It took five thousand years for the full implica- 
tions of the Agricultural Revolution to come to the surface. The transition 
from an agricultural society to an industrial society based on manufacturing 
and chemical power unfolded more quickly. It took centuries. The transition 
to the Information Society will happen more rapidly still, probably within a 
lifetime. Yet even allowing for the foreshortening of history, you can expect 
decades to pass before the full megapolitical impact of existing information 
technology is realized. 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 63 


Major and Minor Megapolitical Transitions 


This chapter analyzes some of the common features of megapolitical transi- 
tions. In following chapters we look more closely at the Agricultural Revolu- 
tion, and the transition from farm to factory, the second of the previous great 
phase changes. Within the agricultural stage of civilization there were many 
minor megapolitical transitions such as the fall of Rome and the feudal 
revolution of the year 1000. These marked the waxing and waning of the 
power equation as governments rose and fell and the spoils of farming 
passed from one set of hands to another. The owners of sprawling estates 
under the Roman Empire, yeoman farmers in the European Dark Ages, and 
the lords and serfs of the feudal period all ate grain from the same fields. 
They lived under very different governments because of the cumulative 
impact of different technologies, fluctuations in climate, and the disruptive 
influences of disease. 

Our purpose is not to thoroughly explain all of these changes. We do not 
pretend to do so, although we have sketched out some illustrations of 
the way that changing megapolitical variables have altered the way that 
power was exercised in the past. Governments have grown and shrunk as 
megapolitical fluctuations have lowered and raised the costs of projecting 
power. 


Here are some summary points that you should keep in mind as you seek to 
understand the Information Revolution: 


1. A shift in the megapolitical foundations of power normally unfolds far in 
advance of the actual revolutions in the use of power. 

2. Incomes are usually falling when a major transition begins, often because 
a society has rendered itself crisis-prone by marginalizing resources due 
to population pressures. 

3. Seeing “outside” of a system is usually taboo. People are frequently 
blind to the logic of violence in the existing society; therefore, they are 
almost always blind to changes in that logic, latent or overt. Megapolitical 
transitions are seldom recognized before they happen. 

4. Major transitions always involve a cultural revolution, and usually entail 
clashes between adherents of the old and new values. 

5. Megapolitical transitions are never popular, because they antiquate pain- 
stakingly acquired intellectual capital and confound established moral 
imperatives. They are not undertaken by popular demand, but in response 
to changes in the external conditions that alter the logic of violence in 
the local setting. 


64 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


6. Transitions to new ways of organizing livelihoods or new types of govern- 
ment are initially confined to those areas where the megapolitical cata- 
lysts are at work. 

7. With the possible exception of the early stages of farming, past transitions 
have always involved periods of social chaos and heightened violence 
due to disorientation and breakdown of the old system. 

8. Corruption, moral decline, and inefficiency appear to be signal features 
of the final stages of a system. 

9. The growing importance of technology in shaping the logic of violence 
has led to an acceleration of history, leaving each successive transition 
with less adaptive time than ever before. 


History Speeds Up 


With events unfolding many times faster than during previous transforma- 
tions, early understanding of how the world will change could turn out to be 
far more useful to you than it would have been to your ancestors at an 
equivalent juncture in the past. Even if the first farmers had miraculously 
understood the full megapolitical implications of tilling the earth, this infor- 
mation would have been practically useless because thousands of years were 
to pass before the transition to the new phase of society was complete. 

Not so today. History has sped up. Forecasts that correctly anticipate the 
megapolitical implications of new technology are likely to be far more useful 
today. If we can develop the implications of the current transition to the 
Information Society to the same extent that someone with current knowledge 
could have grasped the implications of past transitions to farm and factory, 
that information should be many times more valuable now. Put simply, the 
action horizon for megapolitical forecasts has shrunk to its most useful 
range, within the span of a single lifetime. 


“Looking back over the centuries, or even if looking only at the present, we 
can clearly observe that many men have made their living, often a very good 
living, from their special skill in applying weapons of violence, and that their 
activities have had a very large part in determining what uses were made of 
scarce resources.” !6 


—FREDERIC C. LANE 


Our study of megapolitics is an attempt to do just that—to draw out the 
implications of the changing factors that alter the boundaries where violence 
is exercised. These megapolitical factors largely determine when and where 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 65 


violence pays. They also help inform the market distribution of income. As 
economic historian Frederic Lane so clearly put it, how violence is organized 
and controlled plays a large role in determining “what uses are made of 
scarce resources.” !’ 


A CRASH COURSE IN MEGAPOLITICS 


The concept of megapolitics is a powerful one. It helps illuminate some of 
the major mysteries of history: how governments rise and fall and what types 
of institutions they become; the timing and outcome of wars; patterns of 
economic prosperity and decline. By raising or lowering the costs and re- 
wards of projecting power, megapolitics governs the ability of people to 
impose their will on others. This has been true from the earliest human 
societies onward. It still is. We explored many of the important hidden 
megapolitical factors that determine the evolution of history in Blood in the 
Streets and The Great Reckoning. The key to unlocking the implications of 
megapolitical change is understanding the factors that precipitate revolutions 
in the use of violence. These variables can be somewhat arbitrarily grouped 
into four categories: topography, climate, microbes, and technology. 

1. Topography is a crucial factor, as evidenced by the fact that control of 
violence on the open seas has never been monopolized as it has on land. No 
government’s laws have ever exclusively applied there. This is a matter of 
the utmost importance in understanding how the organization of violence 
and protection will evolve as the economy migrates into cyberspace. 

Topography, in conjunction with climate, had a major role to play in early 
history. The first states emerged on floodplains, surrounded by desert, such 
as in Mesopotamia and Egypt, where water for irrigation was plentiful but 
surrounding regions were too dry to support yeoman farming. Under such 
conditions, individual farmers faced a very high cost for failing to cooperate 
in maintaining the political structure. Without irrigation, which could be 
provided only on a large scale, crops would not grow. No crops meant 
starvation. The conditions that placed those who controlled the water in a 
desert in a position of strength made for despotic and rich government. 

As we analyzed in The Great Reckoning, topographic conditions also 
played a major role in the prosperity of yeoman farmers in ancient Greece, 
enabling that region to become the cradle of Western democracy. Given the 
primitive transportation conditions prevailing in the Mediterranean region 
three thousand years ago, it was all but impossible for persons living more 
than a few miles from the sea to compete in the production of high-value 
crops of the ancient world, olives and grapes. If the oil and the wine had to 
be transported any distance overland, the portage costs were so great that 


66 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


they could not be sold at a profit. The elaborate shoreline of the Greek 
littoral meant that most areas of Greece were no more than twenty miles 
from the sea. This gave a decisive advantage to Greek farmers over their 
potential competitors in landlocked areas. 

Because of this advantage in trading high-value products, Greek farmers 
earned high incomes from control of only small parcels of land. These high 
incomes enabled them to purchase costly armor. The famous hoplites of 
ancient Greece were farmers or landlords who armed themselves at their 
own expense. Both well armed and well motivated, the Greek hoplites were 
militarily formidable and could not be ignored. Topographic conditions were 
the foundation of Greek democracy, just as those of a different kind gave 
rise to the Oriental despotisms of Eygpt and elsewhere. 

2. Climate also helps set the boundaries within which brute force can be 
exercised. A climatic change was the catalyst for the first major transition 
from foraging to farming. The end of the last Ice Age, about thirteen thou- 
sand years ago, led to a radical alteration in vegetation. Beginning in the 
Near East, where the Ice Age retreated first, a gradual rise in temperature 
and rainfall spread forests into areas that had previously been grasslands. In 
particular, the rapid spread of beech forests seriously curtailed the human 
diet. As Susan Alling Gregg put it in Foragers and Farmers: 


The establishment of beech forests must have had serious consequences for 
local human, plant and animal populations. The canopy of an oak forest is 
relatively open and allows large amounts of sunlight to reach the forest floor. 
An exuberant undergrowth of mixed shrubs, forbs, and grasses develops, and 
the diversity of plants supports a variety of wildlife. In contrast, the canopy of 
a beech forest is closed and the forest floor is heavily shaded. Other than a 
flush of spring annuals prior to the emergence of the leaves, only shade-tolerant 
sedges, ferns, and a few grasses are found.” !® 


Over time, dense forests encroached on the open plains, spreading 
throughout Europe into the Eastern steppes.'? The forests reduced the graz- 
ing area available to support large animals, making it increasingly difficult 
for the population of human foragers to support themselves. 

The population of hunter-gatherers had swollen too greatly during the Ice 
Age prosperity to support itself on the dwindling herds of large mammals, 
many species of which were hunted to extinction. The transition to agricul- 
ture was not a choice of preference, but an improvisation adopted under 
duress to make up for shortfalls in the diet. Foraging continued to predomi- 
nate in those areas farther north, where the warming trend had not adversely 
affected the habitats of large mammals, and in tropical rainforests, where 
the global warming trend did not have the perverse effect of reducing food 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 67 


supplies. Since the advent of farming, it has been far more common for 
changes to be precipitated by the cooling rather than the warming of the 
climate. | 

A modest understanding of the dynamics of climatic change in past socie- 
ties could well prove useful in the event that climates continue to fluctuate. 
If you know that a drop of one degree Centigrade on average reduces the 
growing season by three to four weeks and shaves five hundred feet off the 
maximum elevation at which crops can be grown, then you know something 
about the boundary conditions that will confine people’s action in the fu- 
ture.2° You can use this knowledge to forecast changes in everything from 
grain prices to land values. You may even be able to draw informed conclu- 
sions about the likely impact of falling temperatures on real incomes and 
political stability. In the past, governments have been overthrown when crop 
failures extending over several years raised food prices and shrank dispos- 
able incomes. 

For example, it is no coincidence that the seventeenth century, the coldest 
in the modern period, was also a period of revolution worldwide. A hidden 
megapolitical cause of this unhappiness was sharply colder weather. It was 
so cold, in fact, that wine froze on the “Sun King’s” table at Versailles. 
Shortened growing seasons produced crop failures and undermined real 
income. Because of the colder weather, prosperity began to wind down 
into a long global depression that began around 1620. It proved drastically 
destabilizing. The economic crisis of the seventeenth century led to the 
world being overwhelmed by rebellions, many clustering in 1648, exactly 
two hundred years before another and more famous cycle of rebellions. 
Between 1640 and 1650, there were rebellions in Ireland, Scotland, England, 
Portugal, Catalonia, France, Moscow, Naples, Sicily, Brazil, Bohemia, 
Ukraine, Austria, Poland, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Turkey. Even China 
and Japan were swept with unrest. 

It may also be no coincidence that mercantilism predominated in the 
seventeenth century during a period of shrinking trade. Economic closure 
was perhaps most pronounced at the end of the century, “when a terrible 
famine occurred.” 2! By the eighteenth century, especially after 1750, warmer 
temperatures and higher crop yields had begun to raise real incomes in 
Western Europe sufficiently to expand demand for manufactured goods. 
More free-market policies were adopted. This led to a self-reinforcing burst 
of economic growth as industry expanded to a larger scale in what is com- 
monly described as the Industrial Revolution. The growing importance of 
technology and manufactured output reduced the impact of the weather on 
economic cycles. 

Even today, however, you should not underestimate the impact of suddenly 
colder weather in lowering real incomes—even in wealthy regions such as 


68 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


North America. There is a strong tendency for societies to render themselves 
crisis-prone when the existing configuration of institutions has exhausted its 
potential. In the past, this tendency has often been manifested by population 
increases that stretched the carrying capacity of land to the limit. This 
happened both before the transition of the year 1000 and again at the end of 
the fifteenth century. The plunge in real income caused by crop failures and 
lower yields played a significant role in both instances in destroying the 
predominant institutions. Today the marginalization is manifested in the 
consumer credit markets. If sharply colder weather reduced crop yields and 
lowered disposable incomes, this would lead to debt default as well as tax 
rebellions. If the past is a guide, both economic closure and political instabil- 
ity could result. 

3. Microbes convey power to harm or immunity from harm in ways that 
have often determined how power was exercised. This was certainly the case 
in the European conquest of the New World, as we explored in The Great 
Reckoning. European settlers, arriving from settled agricultural societies 
riddled with disease, brought with them relative immunity from childhood 
infections like measles. The Indians they encountered lived largely in thinly 
populated foraging bands. They possessed no such immunity and were deci- 
mated. Often, the greatest mortality occurred before white people even ar- 
rived, as Indians who first encountered Europeans on the coasts traveled 
inland with infections. 

There are also microbiological barriers to the exercise of power. In Blood 
in the Streets, we discussed the role that potent strains of malaria served in 
making tropical Africa impervious to invasion by white men for many centu- 
ries. Before the discovery of quinine in the mid-nineteenth century, white 
armies could not survive in malarial regions, however superior their weapons 
might have been. 

The interaction between humans and microbes has also produced im- 
portant demographic effects that altered the costs and rewards of violence. 
When fluctuations in mortality are high due to epidemic disease, famine, or 
other causes, the relative risk of mortality in warfare falls. The declining 
frequency of eruptions in death rates from the sixteenth century onward 
helps explain smaller family size and, ultimately, the far lower tolerance of 
sudden death in war today as compared to the past. This has had the effect 
of lowering the tolerance for imperialism and raising the costs of projecting 
power in societies with low birthrates. 

Contemporary societies, comprising small families, tend to find even 
small numbers of battle deaths intolerable. By contrast, early modern socie- 
ties were much more tolerant of the mortality costs associated with imperial- 
ism. Before this century, most parents gave birth to many children, some of 
whom were expected to die randomly and suddenly from disease. In an era 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 69 


when early death was commonplace, would-be soldiers and their families 
faced the dangers of the battlefield with less resistance. 


“Machinery is aggressive. The weaver becomes a web, the machinist a ma- 
chine. If you do not use tools, they use you.” 


——EMERSON 


4. Technology has played by far the largest role in determining the costs 
and rewards of projecting power during the modern centuries. The argument 
of this book presumes it will continue to do so. Technology has several 
crucial dimensions: 


A. Balance between offense and defense. The balance between the offense 
and the defense implied by prevailing weapons technology helps deter- 
mine the scale of political organization. When offensive capabilities are 
rising, the ability to project power at a distance predominates, jurisdic- 
tions tend to consolidate, and governments form on a larger scale. At 
other times, like now, defensive capabilities are rising. This makes it 
more costly to project power outside of core areas. Jurisdictions tend to 
devolve, and big governments break down into smaller ones. 

B. Equality and the predominance of the infantry. A key feature determining 
the degree of equality among citizens is the nature of weapons technol- 
ogy. Weapons that are relatively cheap, can be employed by nonprofes- 
sionals, and enhance the military importance of infantry tend to equalize 
power. When Thomas Jefferson wrote that “all men are created equal,” 
he was saying something that was much more true than a similar state- 
ment would have seemed centuries earlier. A farmer with his hunting 
rifle was not only as well armed as the typical British soldier with his 
Brown Bess, he was better armed. The farmer with the rifle could shoot 
at the soldier from a greater distance, and with greater accuracy than the 
soldier could return fire. This was a distinctly different circumstance 
from the Middle Ages, when a farmer with a pitchfork—he could not 
have afforded more—could scarcely have hoped to stand against a heav- 
ily armed knight on horseback. No one was writing in 1276 that “all 
men are created equal.” At that time, in the most manifestly important 
sense, men were not equal. A single knight exercised far more brute 
force than dozens of peasants put together. 

C. Advantages and disadvantages of scale in violence. Another variable that 
helps determine whether there are a few large governments or many 


70 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


small ones is the scale of organization required to deploy the prevailing 
weapons. When there are increasing returns to violence, it is more re- 
warding to operate governments at a large scale; therefore governments 
tend to get bigger. When a small group can command effective means of 
resisting an assault by a large group, which was the case during the 
Middle Ages, sovereignty tends to fragment. Small, independent authori- 
ties exercise many of the functions of government. As we explore in a 
latter chapter, we believe that the Information Age will bring the dawn 
of cybersoldiers, who will be heralds of devolution. Cybersoldiers could 
be deployed not merely by nation-states but by very small organizations, 
and even by individuals. Wars of the next millennium will include some 
almost bloodless battles fought with computers. 

D. Economies of scale in production. Another important factor that weighs 
in the balance in determining whether ultimate power is exercised locally 
or from a distance is the scale of the predominant enterprises in which 
people gain their livelihoods. When crucial enterprises can function opti- 
mally only when they are organized on a large scale in an encompassing 
trading area, governments that expand to provide such a setting for enter- 
prises under their protection may rake off enough additional wealth to 
pay the costs of maintaining a large political system. Under such condi- 
tions, the entire world economy usually functions more effectively where 
one supreme world power dominates all others, as the British Empire did 
in the nineteenth century. 

But sometimes megapolitical variables combine to produce falling 
economies of scale. If the economic benefits of maintaining a large 
trading area dwindle, larger governments that previously prospered from 
exploiting the benefits of encompassing trading areas may begin to break 
apart—even if the balance of weaponry between offense and defense 
otherwise remains much as it had been. 

E. Dispersal of technology. Still another factor that contributes to the power 
equation is the degree of dispersal of key technologies. When weapons 
or tools of production can be effectively hoarded or monopolized, they 
tend to centralize power. Even technologies that are essentially defensive 
in character, like the machine gun, proved to be potent offensive weap- 
ons, that contributed to a rising scale of governance during the period 
when they were not widely dispersed. When the European powers en- 
joyed a monopoly on machine guns late in the nineteenth century, they 
were able to use those weapons against peoples at the periphery to 
dramatically expand colonial empires. Later, in the twentieth century, 
when machine guns became widely available, especially in the wake of 
World War II, they were deployed to help destroy the power of empires. 
Other things being equal, the more widely dispersed key technologies 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 71 


are, the more widely dispersed power will tend to be, and the smaller the 
optimum scale of government. 


THE SPEED OF MEGAPOLITICAL CHANGE 


While technology is by far the most important factor today, and apparently 
growing more so, all four major megapolitical factors have played a role in 
determining the scale at which power could be exercised in the past. 

Together, these factors determine whether the returns to violence continue 
to rise as violence is employed on a larger scale. This determines the impor- 
tance of magnitude of firepower versus efficiency in employing resources. It 
also strongly influences the market distribution of income. The question is, 
What role will they command in the future? A key to estimating an answer 
lies in recognizing that these megapolitical variables mutate at dramatically 
different speeds. 

Topography has been almost fixed through the whole of recorded history. 
Except for minor local effects involving the silting of harbors, landfills, or 
erosion, the topography of the earth is almost the same today as it was when 
Adam and Eve straggled out of Eden. And it is likely to remain so until 
another Ice Age recarves the landscapes of continents or some other drastic 
event disturbs the surface of the earth. At a more profound scale, geological 
ages seem to shift, perhaps in response to large meteorite strikes, over a 
period of 10 to 40 million years. Someday, there may again be geological 
upheavals that will alter significantly the topography of our planet. If that 
happens, you can safely assume that both the baseball and cricket seasons 
will be canceled. 

Climate fluctuates much more actively than topography. In the last million 
years, climatic change has been responsible for most of the known variation 
in the features of the earth’s surface. During Ice Ages, glaciers gouged new 
valleys, altered the course of rivers, severed islands from continents or joined 
them together by lowering the sea level. Fluctuations in climate have played 
a significant role in history, first in precipitating the Agricultural Revolution 
after the close of the last Ice Age, and later in destablizing regimes during 
periods of colder temperatures and drought. 

Lately, there have been concerns over the possible impact of “global 
warming.” These concerns cannot be dismissed out of hand. Yet, taking a 
longer perspective, the more likely risk appears to be a shift toward a colder, 
not a warmer climate. Study of temperature fluctuations based upon analysis 
of oxygen isotopes in core samples taken from the ocean floor show that the 
current period is the second warmest in more than 2 million years.?? If 
temperatures were to turn colder, as they did in the seventeenth century, 


72 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


that might prove megapolitically destabilizing. Current alarms about global 
warming may in that sense be reassuring. To the extent that they are true, 
that assures that temperatures will continue to fluctuate within the abnor- 
mally warm and relatively benign range experienced for the past three centu- 
ries. 

The rate of change in the influence of microbes on the exercise of power 
is more of a puzzle. Microbes can mutate very rapidly. This is especially 
true of viruses. The common cold, for example, mutates in an almost kalei- 
doscopic way. Yet although these mutations proceed apace, their impact in 
shifting the boundaries where power is exercised have been far less abrupt 
than technological change. Why? Part of the reason is that the normal bal- 
ance of nature tends to make it beneficial for microbes to infect but not 
destroy host populations. Virulent infections that kill their hosts too readily 
tend to eradicate themselves in the process. The survival of microparasites 
depends upon their not being too rapidly or uniformly fatal to the hosts they 
invade. 

That is not to say, of course, that there cannot be deadly eruptions of 
disease that alter the balance of power. Such episodes have figured promi- 
nently in history. The Black Death wiped out large fractions of the popula- 
tion of Eurasia and dealt a crushing blow to the fourteenth-century version 
of the international economy. 


What Might Have Been 


History can be understood in terms of what might have been as well as what 
was. We know of no reason that microparasites could not have continued to 
play havoc with human society during the modern period. For example, it is 
possible that microbiological barriers to the exercise of power, equivalent to 
malaria but more virulent, could have halted the Western invasion of the 
periphery in its tracks. The first intrepid Portuguese adventurers who sailed 
into African waters could have contracted a deadly retrovirus, a more com- 
municable version of AIDS, that would have stopped the opening of the new 
trade route to Asia before it even began. Columbus, too, and the first waves 
of settlers in the New World might have encountered diseases that decimated 
them in the same way that indigenous local populations were affected by 
measles and other Western childhood diseases. Yet nothing of the kind 
happened, a coincidence that underlines the intuition that history has a 
destiny. 

Microbes did far less to impede the consolidation of power in the modern 
period than to facilitate it. Western troops and colonists at the periphery 
often found that the technological advantages that allowed them to project 
power were underscored by microbiological ones. Westerners were armed 


Megapolitical Transformations in Historic Perspective 73 


with unseen biological weapons, their relative immunity to childhood dis- 
eases that frequently devastated native peoples. This gave voyagers from the 
West a distinct advantage that their antagonists from less densely settled 
regions lacked. As events unfolded, the disease transfer was almost entirely 
in one direction—from Europe outward. There was no equivalent transfer 
of disease in the other direction, from the periphery to the core. 

As a possible counterexample, some have claimed that Western explorers 
imported syphilis from the New World to Europe. This is arguable. If true, 
however, it did not prove to be a significant barrier to the exercise of power. 
The major impact of syphilis was to shift sexual mores in the West. 

From the end of the fifteenth century to the last quarter of the twentieth, 
the impact of microbes on industrial society was ever more benign. Notwith- 
standing the personal tragedies and unhappiness caused by outbreaks of 
tuberculosis, polio, and flu, no new diseases emerged in the modern period 
that even approached the megapolitical impact of the Antonine plagues or 
the Black Death. Improving public health, and the advent of vaccinations 
and antidotes, generally reduced the importance of infectious microbes dur- 
ing the modern period, thereby increasing the relative importance of technol- 
ogy in setting the boundaries where power was exercised. 

The recent emergence of AIDS and alarms over the potential spread of 
exotic viruses are hints that the role of microbes may not be altogether as 
megapolitically benign in the future as it has been over the past five hundred 
years. But when or whether a new plague will infect the world is unknow- 
able. An eruption of microparasites, such as a viral pandemic, rather than 
drastic changes in climate or topography, would more likely disrupt the 
megapolitical predominance of technology. 

We have no way of monitoring or anticipating drastic departures from the 
nature of life on earth as we have known it. We cross our fingers and 
assume that the major megapolitical variables in the next millennium will be 
technological rather than microbiological. If luck continues to side with 
humanity, technology will continue to grow in prominence as the leading 
megapolitical variable. 

It was not always such, however, as a review of the first great megapolitical 
transformation, the Agricultural Revolution, clearly shows. 


CHAPTER J 


EAaT UF EDEN 


The Agricultural Revolution and the 
sophistication of Violence 


“And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel, thy brother? And he said, 
I know not: Am I my brothers keeper? And he said, What hast thou 
done? the voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me from the ground.” 


—GENESIS 4:9—10 


Five hundred generations ago, the first phase change in the organization of 
human society began.' Our ancestors in several regions reluctantly picked 
up crude implements, sharpened stakes and makeshift hoes, and went to 
work. As they sowed the first crops, they also laid a new foundation for 
power in the world. The Agricultural Revolution was the first great economic 
and social revolution. It started with the expulsion from Eden and moved so 
slowly that farming had not completely displaced hunting and gathering in 
all suitable areas of the globe when the twentieth century opened. Experts 
believe that even in the Near East, where farming first emerged, it was 
introduced in “a long incremental process” that “may have taken five thou- 
sand years or more.” ? 

It may seem an exaggeration to describe a process that stretched out over 
millennia as a “revolution.” Yet that is precisely what the advent of farming 
was, a slow-motion revolution that transformed human life by altering the 
logic of violence. Wherever farming took root, violence emerged as a more 
important feature of social life. Hierarchies adept at manipulating or control- 
ling violence came to dominate society. 


East of Eden 75 


Understanding the Agricultural Revolution is a first step toward under- 
standing the Information Revolution. The introduction of tilling and harvest- 
ing provides a paradigm example of how an apparently simple shift in the 
character of work can radically alter the organization of society. Put this past 
revolution into perspective and you are in a far stronger position to forecast 
how history may unfold in response to the new logic of violence introduced 
with microprocessors. 

To appreciate the revolutionary character of agriculture, you first need a 
picture of how the primeval society functioned before farming. We surveyed 
this in The Great Reckoning and offer a further sketch below. Hunting-and- 
gathering societies were the only forms of social organization through a 
long, prehistoric slumber when human life changed little or not at all from 
generation to generation. Anthropologists claim that humans have been hunt- 
ers and gatherers for 99 percent of the time since we appeared on earth. 
Crucial to the long success and ultimate failure of hunting-and-gathering 
bands is the fact that they had to operate on a very small scale over a very 
wide area. 

Foragers could survive only where population densities were light. To see 
why, think of the problems that larger groups would have posed. For one 
thing, a thousand hunters parading together across a landscape would have 
raised such a ruckus as to scare away the game they sought to trap. And 
even worse, had a small army of hunters occasionally managed to corner a 
huge herd of game, the food they harvested, including fruits and edible 
plants found in the wild, could not have remained plentiful for long. A 
large group of foragers would have laid waste to the countryside through 
overharvesting like a starving army in the Thirty Years War. Therefore, to 
minimize overkill, hunting bands had to be small. As Stephen Boyden writes 
in Western Civilization in Biological Perspective, “Most commonly, hunter- 
gatherer groups number between twenty-five and fifty individuals.” > 

To live on ten thousand acres in a temperate climate today is a luxury 
allowed only to the very rich. A family of hunter-gatherers could scarcely 
have survived on less. They generally required thousands of acres per person, 
even in areas that were most fertile for foraging. This suggests why the 
growth of human populations during periods particularly favorable to forag- 
ing may have created the basis for population crises. Because so much 
land was required to support a single person, the population densities of 
hunting-and-gathering societies had to be incredibly sparse. Before farming, 
humans were about as densely settled as bears. 

With minor differences, the human diet resembled that of bears. Foraging 
societies depended upon food gathered from the open countryside or from 
nearby bodies of water. Although some gatherers were fishers, most were 
hunters who depended for a third to a fifth of their food upon protein from 


76 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


large mammals. Other than a few simple tools and objects carried around 
with them, hunter-gatherers had almost no technology at their disposal. They 
usually had no way to effectively store quantities of meat or other foods for 
later use. Most food had to be consumed soon after it was gathered or left to 
spoil. That is not say, of course, that some hunter-gatherers did not eat 
spoiled food. Eskimos, as Boyden reports, “are said to have a particular 
liking for decomposed food.” * He repeats the observations of experts that 
Eskimos “ ‘bury fish heads and allow them to decay until the bones become 
of the same consistency as the flesh. They then knead the reeking mass into 
a paste and eat it’; they also enjoy the ‘fat maggoty larvae of the caribou fly 
served raw... deer droppings, munched like berries .. . and marrow more 
than a year old, swarming with maggots.’ ”>° 

Other than such delicacies, foragers developed little surplus food. As 
anthropologist Gregg notes, “mobile populations generally do not store 
foodstuffs against seasonal or unexpected lows in resource availability.” 
Consequently, foragers had little to steal. A division of labor that included 
specialization to employ violence was insupportable in settings where sur- 
plus food could not be stored. The logic of the hunt also dictated that 
violence among hunting-and-foraging bands could never rise above a small 
scale because the groups themselves had to remain tiny. 

The small scale of foraging bands was advantageous in another way. 
Members of such small groups would have known one another intimately, a 
factor that made them more effective in working together. Decision-making 
becomes more difficult as numbers rise, because incentive traps proliferate. 
You need only think how hard it is to get a dozen people organized to go out 
to dinner. Imagine how hopeless would have beey the task of organizing 
hundreds or thousands of persons to traipse around on a moveable feast. 
Lacking any sustained and separate political organization or bureaucracy 
required by specialization for war, hunting-and-gathering bands had to de- 
pend on persuasion and consensus—principles that work best among small 
groups with relatively easygoing attitudes. 

Whether hunting-and-gathering bands were easygoing is open to debate. 
Sir Henry Maine refers to “the universal belligerency of primitive man.” In 
his words, “It is not peace which is natural and primitive but war.” ® His 
view has been underlined by the work of evolutionary biologists. R. Paul 
Shaw and Yuwa Wong comment: “[T]here are strong indications that many 
of the injuries apparent in remains of Australopithecus, Homo erectus, and 
Homo sapiens of the European fourth and pre-fourth glacial periods resulted 
from combat.”’ But others doubt this. Experts like Stephen Boyden argue 
that primitive groups were usually not warlike or prone to violence. Social 
conventions developed to reduce internal tensions and facilitate the sharing 
of the hunt. Especially in areas where humans preyed on larger game, which 


East of Eden 77 


was difficult for a single hunter to fell, religious and social doctrines 
emerged to facilitate the redistribution of any game that was taken with the 
whole group. The first priority of sharing of caloric resources was with other 
hunters. Necessity, rather than sentiment, was the spur. The first claim on the 
resources was exercised by the most economically competent and militarily 
strong, not by the sick and the weak. Undoubtedly, a major influence in- 
forming this priority was the fact that hunters in the prime of life were also 
militarily the most potent members of the small band. By assuring them 
a first claim on the hunt, the group minimized potentially lethal internal 
squabbling. 

So long as population densities remained low, the foragers’ gods were not 
militant gods but embodiments of natural forces or the animals they hunted. 
The scantiness of capital and open frontiers made war in most cases unneces- 
sary. There were few neighbors outside one’s own small family or clan to 
pose threats. Because foragers tended to roam in search of food, personal 
possessions beyond a bare minimum became an encumbrance. Those with 
few possessions necessarily experienced little property crime. When con- 
flicts arose, the contending parties were often content to walk away because 
they had little invested in any given locale. Escape was an easy solution to 
personal feuds or exorbitant demands of other kinds. This does not mean 
that early humans were peaceful. They may have been violent and unpleasant 
to a degree we can scarcely imagine. But if they employed violence, it was 
mostly for personal reasons or, what may be worse, for sport. 

The livelihoods of hunter-gatherers depended upon their functioning in 
small bands that allowed little or no scope for a division of labor other than 
along gender lines. They had no organized government, usually no perma- 
nent settlements, and no possibility for accumulating wealth. Even such 
basic building blocks of civilization as a written language were unknown in 
the primeval economy. Without a written language there could be no formal 
records and no history. 


Overkill 


The dynamic of foraging created very different incentives to work than those 
to which we have become accustomed since the advent of farming. The 
capital requirements for life as a forager were minimal. A few primitive 
tools and weapons sufficed. There was no outlet for investment, not even 
private property in land, except occasionally in quarries where flint or soap- 
stone was mined.* As anthropologist Susan Alling Gregg wrote in Foragers 
and Farmers, “Ownership of and access to resources” was “held in common 
by the group.” ° With rare exceptions, such as fishers living on the shores of 
lakes, foragers usually had no fixed place of abode. Having no permanent 


78 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


homes, they had little need to work hard to acquire property or maintain it. 
They had no mortgage or taxes to pay, no furniture to buy. Their few 
consumer goods were animal skins, and personal adornments made by mem- 
bers of the group themselves. There was little incentive to acquire or accu- 
mulate anything that might have passed for money because there was little 
to buy. Under such conditions, savings for the foragers could have been no 
more than a rudimentary concept. 

With no reason to earn and almost no division of labor, the concept of 
hard work as a virtue must have been foreign to hunting-and-gathering 
groups. Except during periods of unusual hardship, when protracted effort 
was required to find something to eat, little work was done because little 
was needed. There was literally nothing to be gained by working beyond 
the bare minimum required for survival. For the members of the typical 
hunting-and-gathering band, that meant working only about eight to fifteen 
hours a week.'® Because a hunter’s labor did not augment the food supply 
but could only reduce it, one who heroically labored overtime to kill more 
animals or pick more fruit than could be eaten before it spoiled contributed 
nothing to prosperity. To the contrary, overkill reduced the prospects of 
finding food in the future, and thus had a detrimental impact on the well- 
being of the group. That is why some foragers, such as Eskimos, punished 
or ostracized members of the band who engaged in overkill. 

The example of the Eskimos punishing overkill is particularly telling, 
because they, far more than others, might well have been able to store meat 
by freezing it. Further, it would have been feasible to provide at least some 
storage for oils rendered from large marine animals. The fact that foragers 
generally chose not to do so reflects their far more passive interactions with 
nature. It may also indicate the degree to which cognition and mental pro- 
cesses are biased by culture. Constraints on learning and behavior in com- 
plex environments make adoption of some strategies far more difficult than 
would otherwise appear. As R. Paul Shaw and Yuwa Wong have written, 
“Because niches differ in many respects, so, too, do biases in learning.” |! 

Seen in this perspective, the advent of agriculture entailed more than a 
change in diet; it also launched a great revolution in the organization of 
economic life and culture as well as a transformation of the logic of violence. 
Farming created large-scale capital assets in land and sometimes in irrigation 
systems. The crops and domesticated animals farmers raised were valuable 
assets. They could be stored, hoarded, and stolen. Because crops had to be 
tended over the entire growing season, from planting through harvest, migra- 
tion away from threats became less attractive, especially in arid regions 
where opportunities to grow crops were confined to the small areas of the 
land with dependable water supplies. As escape became more difficult, 
opportunities for organized shakedowns and plunder increased. Farmers 


East of Eden 79 


were subject to raids at harvesttime, which gradually raised the scale of 
warfare. 

This tended to increase the size of societies because contests of violence 
more often than not were won by the larger group. As competition over 
land and control of its output became more intense, societies became more 
stationary. A division of labor became more apparent. Employment and 
slavery arose for the first time. Farmers and herders specialized in producing 
food. Potters produced containers in which food was stored. Priests prayed 
for rain and bountiful harvests. Specialists in violence, the forefathers of 
government, increasingly devoted themselves to plunder and protection from 
plunder. Along with the priests, they became the first wealthy persons in 
history. 

In the early stages of agricultural societies, these warriors came to control 
a portion of the annual crop as a price of protection. In places where threats 
were minimal, yeoman farmers were sometimes able to retain a relatively 
large degree of autonomy. But as population densities rose, and competition 
over food intensified, especially in regions around deserts where productive 
land was at a premium, the warrior group could take a large fraction of total 
output. These warriors founded the first states with the proceeds of this 
rake-off, which reached as high as 25 percent of the grain crop and one-half 
the increase in herds of domesticated animals. Farming, therefore, dramati- 
cally increased the importance of coercion. The surge in resources capable 
of being plundered led to a large surge in plunder. 

It took millennia for the full logic of the Agricultural Revolution to play 
itself out. For a long while, sparse populations of farmers in temperate 
regions may have lived much as their foraging forebears had done. Where 
land and rainfall were ample, farmers harvested crops on a small scale 
without much violent interference. But as populations rose over a period of 
several thousand years, farmers even in thinly settled regions became subject 
to erratic plunder that sometimes must have left them with insufficient seed 
to replant the next year’s crop. Competitive plundering, or anarchy, was a 
possibility at one extreme, as well as unprotected communities living with- 
out any specialized organization to monopolize violence. 

As time passed, the logic of violence inherent in agriculture imposed itself 
over an ever-wider terrain. The regions where farming and herding could 
continue without the predations of government receded to a few truly remote 
areas. The Kafir regions of Afghanistan, to cite an extreme example, resisted 
the imposition of government until the last decade of the nineteenth century. 
But in so doing, they were transformed centuries earlier into a quite militant 
society, organized along kinship lines. Such arrangements were not capable 
of mustering force on a large scale. Until the British brought modern weap- 
ons to the region, the Kafirs remained independent in their remote Bashgal 


80 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


and Waigal valleys because their redoubts were protected by features of 
topography, high mountains, and deserts that stood between them and con- 
querors from the outside. '? 

Over time, the basic logic of the Agricultural Revolution impressed itself 
on the societies where farming took hold. Farming sharply raised the scale 
at which human communities could form. Beginning about ten thousand 
years ago, cities began to emerge. Although tiny by today’s standards, they 
were the centers of the first “civilizations,” a word derived from civitas, 
which means “citizenship” or “inhabitants of a city” in Latin. Because 
farming created assets to plunder and to protect, it also created a requirement 
for inventory accounting. You cannot tax unless you can compile records 
and issue receipts. The symbols employed in the accountant’s ledger became 
the rudiments of written language, an innovation that had never existed 
among hunters and gatherers. 

Farming also extended the horizon over which humans had to solve prob- 
lems. Hunting bands lived within an immediate time horizon. They seldom 
undertook projects that lasted more than a few days. But planting and har- 
vesting a crop took months. Pursuing projects of a longer time frame led 
farmers to train their attentions on the stars. Detailed astronomical observa- 
tions were a precondition for drawing up almanacs and calendars to serve as 
guides on when to best plant and reap. With the advent of farming, human 
horizons expanded. 


PROPERTY 


The move to a settled agricultural society resulted in the emergence of 
private property. Obviously, no one would be content to toil through the 
whole growing season to produce a crop just to see someone else wander 
along and harvest what he produced. The idea of property emerged as an 
inevitable consequence of farming. But the clarity of private property as a 
concept was attenuated by the logic of violence that also accompanied the 
introduction of farming. The emergence of property was confused by the 
fact that the megapolitical power of individuals was no longer as equal as it 
had been in foraging societies, where every healthy adult male was a hunter, 
as well armed as anyone else. Farming gave rise to specialization in violence. 
Precisely because it created something to steal, farming made investments in 
better weaponry profitable. The result was theft, much of it highly organized. 

The powerful were now able to organize a new form of predation: a local 
monopoly of violence, or government. This sharply differentiated society, 
creating quite different circumstances for those who benefited from the 
plunder, and the mass of poor who tilled the fields. The few who controlled 


— 


East of Eden 81 


military power could now become rich, along with others who found favor 
with them. The god-kings and their allies, the various lesser, local potentates 
who ruled the first Near Eastern states, enjoyed much more nearly modern 
forms of property than the great mass who toiled beneath them. 

Of course, it is anachronistic to think of a distinction between private and 
public wealth in the early agricultural societies. The ruling god-king had the 
full resources of the state at his disposal in a way that could hardly be 
distinguished from ownership of a sprawling estate. Much as in the feudal 
period of European history, all property was subject to the overlordship of 
higher potentates. Those down the chain of hierarchy found their property 
subject to attenuation at the whim of the ruler. 

Yet to say that the potentate was not restrained by law does not mean that 
he could afford to seize anything he pleased. Costs and rewards impinged 
upon the freedom of the pharaoh as much as they do today upon the prime 
minister of Canada. And the pharaoh was much more constrained than 
contemporary leaders by the difficulties of transport and communication. 
Simply hauling loot from one spot to the next, especially when loot was 
measured mainly in the form of agricultural produce, involved a lot of loss 
from spoilage and theft. The proliferation of officials to check on one an- 
other reduced the loss due to pilfering but increased the total overhead costs 
the pharaoh had to bear. Decentralized authority, which optimized output 
under some circumstances, also gave rise to stronger local powers who 
sometimes blossomed into full-fledged challengers for dynastic control. 
Even Oriental despots were by no means free to do as they pleased. They 
had no choice but to recognize the balance of raw power as they found it. 

Although everyone, including the rich, was subject to arbitrary expropria- 
tion, some were able to accumulate property of their own. Then as now, the 
state devoted much of its income to public works. Projects such as irrigation 
systems, religious monuments, and crypts for the kings provided opportuni- 
ties for architects and artisans to earn income. Some well-situated individu- 
als were able to accumulate considerable private property. In fact, a large 
portion of the surviving cuneiform tablets from Sumer, an early Mesopota- 
mian civilization, record various acts of trade, most of which involve the 
transfer of property titles. 

There was private property in the early agricultural societies, but seldom 
at the bottom of the social pyramid. The overwhelming majority of the 
population were peasants who were too poor to accumulate much wealth. In 
fact, with a few exceptions, most peasants, up until modern times, were so 
poor that they stood in constant danger of perishing from starvation any time 
that a drought or a flood or an infestation reduced crop yields. Hence the 
peasants were obliged to organize their affairs in a way that minimized the 
downside risks in bad years. Across the broad and impoverished stratum of 


82 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


society, a more primitive organization of property obtained. It increased the 
chance of survival at the expense of foreclosing the greater part of the 
opportunity to accumulate capital and rise in the economic system. 


Peasant Insurance 


The form that this bargain took was the adoption of what anthropologists 
and social historians describe as the “closed village.” Almost every peasant 
society in premodern times had, as its main form of economic organization, 
the “closed village.” Unlike more modern forms of economic organization, 
in which individuals tend to deal with many buyers and sellers in an open 
market, the households of the closed village joined together to operate like 
an informal corporation, or a large family, not in an open marketplace but in 
a closed system where all the economic transactions of the village tended to 
be struck with a single monopolist—the local landlord, or his agents among 
the village chiefs. The village as a whole would contract with the landlord, 
usually for payment in kind, for a high proportion of the crop, rather than a 
fixed rent. The proportional rent meant that the landlord absorbed part of the 
downside risk of a bad harvest. Of course, the landlord also took the greater 
part of the potential profit. Landlords also typically provided seed. 

This convention also minimized the danger of starvation. It required that 
the landlord, rather than the peasant, save a disproportionate share of his 
part of the harvest. Because agricultural yields were appallingly low in many 
areas in the past, as many as two seeds had to be planted for every three 
harvested. Under such conditions, a bad harvest would mean mass starva- 
tion. The peasants rationally preferred an arrangement which would require 
the landlord to invest in their survival. At the cost of buying at monopolized 
prices, selling cheaply, and providing the landlord with in-kind labor, the 
peasants increased their chances of survival. A similar impulse led the typi- 
cal peasant in a closed village economy to forgo the security of freehold 
property ownership. By putting themselves at the mercy of the village head- 
man, a peasant family improved its chances of benefiting from the regular 
redistribution of fields. Not infrequently, the headman would take the best 
fields for himself and his favorites. But that was a risk that peasants had to 
tolerate in order to enjoy the survival insurance that confused village owner- 
ship of fields provided. At times when crop yields were miserably low, a 
difference in growing conditions of fields a hundred yards apart could make 
the difference between starvation and survival. Peasants frequently opted for 
the arrangement that lowered the downside risk, even at the cost of forgoing 
any hope of increased prosperity. 

In general, risk-averse behavior has been common among all groups that 
operated along the margins of survival. The sheer challenge of survival in 


East of Eden 83 


premodern societies always constrained the behavior of the poor. An interest- 
ing feature of this risk aversion, explored in The Great Reckoning, is that it 
reduced the range of peaceful economic behavior that individuals were so- 
cially permitted to adopt. Taboos and social constraints limited experimenta- 
tion and innovative behavior, even at the obvious cost of forgoing potentially 
advantageous improvements in settled ways of doing things.!? This was a 
rational reflection of the fact that experimentation increases the variability 
of results. Greater variability means not only potentially greater gains but— 
more ominously for those at the very margin of survival—potentially ruin- 
ous losses. A great part of the cultural energy of poor farming societies has 
always been devoted to suppressing experimentation. This repression, in 
effect, was their substitute for insurance policies. If they had insurance, or 
sufficient savings to self-insure their experiments, such strong social taboos 
would not be needed to help ensure survival. 

Cultures are not matters of taste but systems of adaptation to specific 
circumstances that may prove irrelevant or even counterproductive in other 
settings. Humans live in a wide variety of habitats. The wide number of 
potential niches in which we live require variations in behavior that are 
too complex to be informed by instinct. Therefore, behavior is culturally 
programmed. For the vast majority in many agricultural societies, culture 
programmed them for survival, but little more than survival in an environ- 
ment where the luxury of participating in open markets was reserved to 
others. 

Personal ability and personal choice—individual “pursuit of happiness,” 
in the modern sense—were suppressed by taboos and social restrictions that 
have always been most emphatic among the poor. Such restrictions were 
superseded only with great difficulty in societies with limited productivity. 
When and where agricultural productivity was higher, such as in ancient 
Greece, minor megapolitical revolutions occurred. Property took more mod- 
ern forms. “Allod,” or freehold property, emerged. Lands tended to rent for 
a fixed fee, and the tenant absorbed the economic risk as well as a higher 
portion of the profit if the crop was good. Higher savings allow self- 
insurance of riskier behavior. Under such conditions, yeoman farmers could 
rise above the rank of peasantry and sometimes even accumulate indepen- 
dent wealth. 

The tendency for more market-like property rights and relationships to 
develop near the top of an economic hierarchy or, in rarer cases, across 
the whole economy, as societies emerged from poverty, is an important 
characteristic of social organization. It is equally important to note that 
the most common organization of agricultural society historically has 
been essentially feudal, with market relations at the top and the closed 
village system at the bottom. The great mass of peasants were tied to the 


84 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


land in almost all premodern agricultural societies. So long as agricultural 
productivity remained low, or higher productivity was dependent upon 
access to centralized hydraulic systems, the freedom and property rights 
of individual farmers at the bottom remained minimal. In such conditions, 
feudal forms of property prevailed. Land was held by tenure rather than 
through freehold title. Typically, rights of sale, gift, and inheritance were 
restricted. 

Feudalism in its various forms was not only a response to ever-present 
risks of predatory violence. It also was a reaction to appallingly low rates of 
productivity. The two have tended to go hand in hand in farming societies. 
Each frequently contributed to the other. When public authority collapsed, 
property rights and prosperity tended to recede accordingly. Collapsing 
productivity also tended to undermine authority. While not every drought 
or adverse climatic change resulted in the breakdown of public authority, 
many did. 


THE FEUDAL REVOLUTION OF THE YEAR 1000 


Such was the case with the transformation of the year 1000, which launched 
the feudal revolution.'* At that time, megapolitical and economic conditions 
differed in important ways from those we have come to think of as character- 
izing the Middle Ages. In the first few centuries after the fall of Rome, the 
economy of Western Europe withered. The Germanic kingdoms that took 
root in the territories of the former Roman Empire had assumed many 
functions of the Roman state, but at a much less ambitious level. Infrastruc- 
ture more or less went untended. As the centuries passed, bridges and aque- 
ducts fell into disrepair and became unusable. Roman coinage was still 
employed, but it practically disappeared from circulation. Land markets, 
which had thrived in Roman times, more or less dried up. Towns, which had 
been centers of Roman administration, virtually vanished along with the 
taxing power of the state. And so did almost every other accoutrement of 
civilization. 

The “Dark Ages” were so named for a reason. Literacy became so rare 
that anyone who possessed the ability to read and write could expect immu- 
nity from prosecution for almost any crime, including murder. Artistic, 
scientific, and engineering skills that had been highly developed in Roman 
times disappeared. From road building to the grafting of vines and fruit 
trees, Western Europe ceased employing many techniques that had once 
been well known and practiced to a high standard. Even so ancient a device 
as the potter’s wheel disappeared in many places. Mining operations con- 
tracted. Metallurgy receded. Irrigation works in the Mediterranean region 


East of Eden 85 


disintegrated through neglect.'° As historian Georges Duby observed, “At 
the end of the sixth century, Europe was a profoundly uncivilized place.” !° 
Although there was a brief renaissance of central authority under the rule of 
Charlemagne around the year 800, everything soon devolved again after his 
death. 

A surprising corollary to this dreary landscape was the fact that the 
collapse of the Roman state probably raised the living standards of small 
farmers for several centuries. The Germanic kingdoms that dominated West- 
ern Europe during the Dark Ages incorporated some of the relatively easygo- 
ing social features common to their ancestral tribes, such as the legal equality 
of freeholders. As a consequence, small farmers in the Dark Ages were far 
freer than they were to be in the feudal centuries. By that we can also infer 
that they were more prosperous. As we analyzed above in exploring the 
logic of property forms under different conditions of productivity, freehold 
property has historically gone hand in hand with the relative prosperity of 
small farmers. The closed-village and feudal forms of property tended to 
emerge where the capacity of small farmers to make a living was more 
doubtful. 

To be sure, the virtual collapse of commerce during the Dark Ages cost 
small farmers the benefits of trade and advantages of wider markets. The 
demise of the towns undermined the cash economy, but it also meant the 
rural population was no longer called upon to support the crushing burden 
of bureaucracy. As Guy Bois has written, the Roman town was a parasitic 
community, not a center of production: “In the Roman period, the dominant 
function of a city was of a political order. It lived primarily from the revenues 
draining into it from its surroundings by the agency of the land tax... . The 
town, in effect, produced little or nothing for the benefit of the surrounding 
countryside.” '’ The collapse of Roman authority largely freed farmers in 
the countryside from taxes, which had sucked away “between one quarter to 
one third of the gross product of the land, without counting the various 
exactions suffered by small and middling landowners.” !* The taxes were so 
onerous, sometimes enforced by execution, that desertion of property by 
Owners was widespread. The barbarians mercifully allowed these taxes to 
lapse. 


Agri Deserti 


The burdens of government were so greatly reduced by the barbarian 
conquests that an opening was created for the poor to obtain freehold 
property and keep it. Some of the agri deserti, or deserted farms 
abandoned by owners fleeing predatory taxation in the final years of the 
Roman Empire, were brought back into production. Notwithstanding the 


86 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


rude circumstances of the time and the fact that crop yields were 
ridiculously low by modern standards, the Dark Ages were a period of 
relative prosperity for Europe’s smallholders. In fact, they were in a 
stronger position than they would be again until the modern era. For one 
thing, fewer hands were available to till the fertile land, large tracts of 
which had gone out of cultivation. Plagues, wars, and abandonment by 
owners escaping the collapsing Roman Empire had significantly depopu- 
lated areas previously under cultivation. Another advantage enjoyed by 
small farmers in the Dark Ages arose from the adoption in the sixth 
century of new farming technology: the heavy plow, often mounted on 
wheels. Used in tandem with an improved harness that allowed peasants 
to employ multiple oxen, the new technology made it much easier to 
clear forested land in Northern Europe.'? 

Under such conditions, the market for land contracted almost to the van- 
ishing point. New land for farming could be had merely by clearing it and 
sharing part of each new parcel with the appropriate local authorities. This 
process, known as assarting, gave a comfortable outlet for population growth 
for centuries after Rome fell. Assarting became particularly attractive in 
thinly populated northern regions after warmer temperatures in the eighth 
century made farming more productive. 

The leaders of the Germanic tribes who conquered former Roman territor- 
ies had established themselves as large landholders. Most of the rest of the 
population farmed small plots—but under conditions very different from 
those that came later under feudalism. Wealthier landowners, or masters, 
represented about 7—10 percent of the population. It appears that before the 
year 1000, two-thirds of the villagers in a typical area of France were 
freehold landowners.”° They owned about half of all the land in cultivation.*! 
There were few serfs. Coloni, or tenant farmers, amounted to no more than 
5 percent of the population. Slavery persisted, but on a much smaller scale 
than in Roman times. 

The Germanic successor kingdoms to Rome were defended militarily by 
all free men who assembled to bear arms on the call of the king’s local 
representative, the count. Even “small and middling proprietors” were ex- 
pected to club together and send one of their number to fight with the 
infantry.?? In the Edict of Pitres, Charles the Bald ordered all those who 
could afford to do so to muster for battle on horseback. Pope Gregory III 
had attempted to advance this military imperative a century earlier by ban- 
ning the human consumption of horsemeat in 732.73 But there was as yet 
little distinction in status or law between the infantry of freeholders and the 
cavalry. All free men participated in local judicial assemblies and could 
petition for dispute settlement to the count, an office that had existed since 
late Roman times. There was no nobility as such. 


East of Eden 87 


“A social phenomenon, new as a mass phenomenon, suddenly appeared on 
the horizons in the 980s: downward social mobility. Its first victims were the 
small allod-holders.”*4 


—Guy BoIs 


As the Dark Ages wore on, however, several things happened to destabi- 
lize the relationships that had preserved the independence of the yeoman 
farmers and freeholders in the Germanic kingdoms that inherited power after 
Rome's fall: 

1. Populations gradually recovered, placing greater pressures on the use 
of land. Over several centuries, much of the most fertile of the unclaimed 
land was brought into production, engendering growth in Northern Europe 
in particular. The increasing population of farmers relative to the supply of 
land made the labor of each farmer worth less. Most freehold titles were 
broken into ever smaller plots through inheritance. During the Dark Ages, 
children tended to share equally in the estates of their parents. The fragmen- 
tation of holdings at a time of rising population tended to place land at a 
premium once again and led to the re-emergence of active land markets by 
the mid-tenth century. 

2. In the final decades of the tenth century, temperatures suddenly turned 
colder, with a devastating impact on farm output. Three successive crop 
failures led to severe famine from 982 to 984. Famine struck again after 
another crop failure in 994.75 Then, in 997, the problem of falling crop yields 
was compounded by a plague, which struck small family holdings with 
particular force because the smallholders lacked the resources to replace 
labor supplied by lost family members. These clustered crop failures and 
disasters at first led the yeoman farmers to sink into debt. When yields failed 
to recover they could not pay their mortgages. 

3. Power relations were progressively destabilized by the growing impor- 
tance of heavy cavalry. Medieval historian Frances Gies describes the trans- 
formation of the armored cavalryman into the medieval knight: 


Originally a personality of mediocre status raised above the peasant by his 
expensive horse and armor, the knight slowly improved his position in society 
until he became part of the nobility. Although knights remained the lowest rank 
of the upper class, knighthood acquired a unique cachet that made knighting an 
honor prized by the great nobility and even royalty. The cachet was primarily 
the product of the Church’s policy of Christianizing knighthood by sanctifying 
the ceremony of knighting and by sponsoring a code of behavior known as 
chivalry, a code perhaps violated more often than honored, but exercising 
incontestable influence on the thought and conduct of posterity.”6 


88 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


As we recounted in The Great Reckoning, the invention of the stirrup gave 
the armed knight on horseback a formidable assault capability. He could 
now attack at full speed and not be thrown from the saddle by the impact of 
his lance striking a target. The military value of the heavy cavalry was 
further enhanced by an Asian invention that penetrated through Western 
Europe in the tenth century; the nailed iron horseshoe. This further improved 
the durability of the horse on the road.?? Also adding to the improved 
effectiveness of the armed knight were the contoured saddle, which made it 
easier to wield heavy weapons, the spur, and the curb bit, which enabled a 
rider to control the horse with one hand while fighting.”* Together, these 
apparently minor technological innovations dramatically devalued the mili- 
tary importance of the smallholders, who could not afford to maintain war- 
horses and arm themselves. The cheaper of the horses specially bred for war, 
the large chargers known as destriers, were worth four oxen or forty sheep. 
The more expensive warhorses cost ten oxen or one hundred sheep. Armor 
also cost a sum that no small holder could afford, equivalent to the price of 
sixty sheep.”? 

4. The fact that the colder weather, crop failures, famines, and plagues 
occurred during the run-up to the year 1000 also played a role in informing 
behavior. Many people were convinced that the end of the world or the 
Second Coming was at hand. Devout or frightened landowners, large and 
small, gave their land to the Church in preparation for apocalypse. 


“Only a Poor Man Sells Land” 


The unsettled conditions of the late tenth centufy paved the way for the 
feudal revolution. Clustered crop failures and disasters led the yeoman farm- 
ers to sink into debt. When crop yields failed to recover, the freeholders 
faced a desperate situation. Markets always place the greatest pressures on 
the weakest holders. Indeed, that is part of their virtue. They promote effi- 
ciency by removing assets from weak hands. But in late-tenth-century Eu- 
rope, subsistence farming was practically the only occupation. Families who 
lost their land lost their only means of survival. Faced with this unpalatable 
prospect, many or most of the freehold farmers decided to give away their 
fields during the feudal revolution. In the words of Guy Bois, “The only 
sure way for a peasant to hold on to the land he tilled was to concede 
ownership of it to the Church, so he could retain its usufruct.” 7° Others 
ceded some or all of their land to wealthier farmers in whom they had 
confidence, either friendly neighbors or relatives. 

These property transfers were made on the condition that the farmer, his 
family, and his descendants were to remain to work the fields. The poor 
farmers were also to enjoy the reciprocal support of the more substantial 


East of Eden 89 


holders, now the “nobles” who were able to afford horse and armor, and 
thus provide protection to the enlarged estates. Such a bargain can be seen 
from the new serf’s point of view as a halfway station between continuing 
economic ownership and foreclosure. More often than not, it was a bargain 
he could not refuse. 

Falling productivity not only placed poor farmers in a desperate economic 
dilemma; it also instigated an upsurge in predatory violence that undermined 
the security of property. Those without the resources to wrest a share of the 
available and inadequate supply of horses and fodder suddenly found that 
they and their property were no longer safe. To put their dilemma in contem- 
porary terms, it was as if you were forced to arm yourself today with a new 
type of weapon, but the cost of doing so was $100,000. If you could not pay 
that price, you would be at the mercy of those who could. 

Within a few years, the capacity of the king and the courts to enforce 
order collapsed.?! Anyone with armor and a horse could now become a law 
unto himself. The result was a late-tenth-century version of Blade Runner, a 
melee of fighting and plunder that the constituted authorities were powerless 
to stop. Looting and attacks by armed knights disrupted the countryside. It 
is by no means obvious, however, that all the victims of this pillage were the 
poor. To the contrary, the elderly, physically weaker, or ill-prepared among 
the larger landholders made more attractive targets. They had more to steal. 

It was not a coincidence that this happened at the very moment when 
colder weather, famine, and plague were placing a pinch on resources. The 
megapolitical conditions conducive to the breakdown of authority had been 
in place for some time. Their potential for altering the power relations in 
society was not realized, however, until a crisis was triggered. Crop failures 
and famines appear to have done just that. While the exact sequence of 
events is difficult to reconstruct, it appears that the looting was instigated, at 
least in part, by desperate conditions. Once the violence was unleashed, it 
became evident that no one could mobilize the force to stop it. The vast 
majority of poorly armed farmers certainly could do little. Even dozens of 
farmers on foot would have been outmatched by a single armed knight on 
horseback. The freehold farmers, like the constituted authorities, the kings 
with their counts, were powerless to prevent local land from being seized by 
armed warriors. 


“The Peace of God” 


In these desperate conditions, the Church helped to launch feudalism 
through its efforts to negotiate a truce in the violent countryside. Historian 
Guy Bois described the situation this way: “The impotence of the political 
authorities was such that the Church stood in for them in the attempt to 


90 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


restore order, in the movement known as ‘The Peace of God.’ ‘Councils of 
Peace’ proclaimed series of interdictions which were sanctioned by anathe- 
mas; vast ‘assemblies of peace’ received the oaths of the warriors. The 
movement originated in the French Midi (Council of Charroux in 989, 
Council of Narbonne in 990), then gradually spread... .” 

The bargain that the Church struck involved acknowledgment of the over- 
lordship of armed knights in local communities in exchange for a cessation 
or tempering of the violence and looting. Land titles inscribed after the surge 
of violence in the late tenth century suddenly bore the title “nobilis” or 
“miles” as an indication of lordship. The nobility as a separate estate was 
created by the feudal revolution. Property transactions recorded to the same 
individuals only a few years earlier had listed no such distinction. 

Given falling productivity and the economic insecurity of the smallhold- 
ers, the megapolitical power of the armed knights led inevitably to property 
holdings by feudal tenure. By the end of the first quarter of the eleventh 
century, yeoman farmers had largely disappeared. Their freeholdings had 
shrunk to a fraction of their previous extent and were now being worked just 
part-time. The small farmers or their descendants were serfs who spent most 
of their time laboring on the estates of feudal lords, lay and ecclesiastical. 

The breakdown of order that accompanied the feudal revolution led to 
adjustments in behavior which reinforced feudalism. Among them was a 
surge in castle building. Castles had first appeared in northwest Europe as 
primitive wooden structures in the wake of Viking raids in the ninth century. 
Originally command centers for Carolingian officials, they became heredi- 
tary possessions after the feudal revolution. These early redoubts were far 
more primitive than they would later become, but they were nonetheless 
difficult to attack. Once erected, castles were razed only with the greatest 
effort. As they began to dot the countryside, the castles made it ever more 
implausible that the king or his counts could effectively challenge the local 
supremacy of the lords. 


Contributions of the Church to Productivity 


Feudalism was the response of agricultural society to the collapse of order 
at a time of low productivity. During the early stages of feudalism, the 
Church played an important and economically productive role. Among the 
Church’s contributions: 

1. In an environment where military power was decentralized, the Church 
was uniquely placed to maintain peace and develop rules of order that 
transcended fragmented, local sovereignties. This is a job that no secular 
power was positioned to do. The observations of the great religious authority 
A. R. Radcliffe-Brown are directly relevant here. He pointed out that “the 


East of Eden 91 


social function of a religion is independent of its truth or falsity.” Even those 
that are “absurd and repulsive, such as those of some savage tribes, may be 
important and effective parts of the social machinery.” ** This was certainly 
the case with the Church in the early stages of feudalism. It helped create 
rules, as only a religion could, that enabled people to overcome incentive 
traps and behavioral dilemmas. Some of these were moral dilemmas com- 
mon to all human life. But others were local dilemmas, unique to the prevail- 
ing megapolitical conditions. The medieval Church had a special role to play 
in restoring order in the countryside in the final years of the tenth century. By 
providing religious and ceremonial support to local authorities, the Church 
lowered the costs of establishing at least weak local monopolies of violence. 
By helping to establish order in this way, the Church contributed to the 
conditions that ultimately led to more stable configurations of power. 

The Church continued to play a role for a long time thereafter in temper- 
ing the private wars and excesses of violence that otherwise could not be 
contained by civil authorities. The relative importance of the Church as 
opposed to secular authorities is reflected in the fact that by the eleventh 
century, the main administrative division of authority in most of Western 
Europe came to be the parish, rather than the old divisions of civil authority, 
the ager and pagus (town) that had persisted from Roman times through the 
Dark Ages.* 

2. The Church was the main source for preserving and transmitting tech- 
nical knowledge and information. The Church sponsored universities and 
provided the minimal education that medieval society enjoyed. The Church 
also provided a mechanism for reproducing books and manuscripts, includ- 
ing almost all contemporary information about farming and husbandry. The 
scriptoria of the Benedictine monasteries can be understood as an alternate 
technology to printing presses, which did not yet exist. Costly and inefficient 
as the scriptoria were, they were practically the only mechanism for repro- 
ducing and preserving written knowledge in the feudal period. 

3. Partly because its farm managers were literate, the Church did a great 
deal to help improve the productivity of European farming, especially in the 
early stages of feudalism. Before the thirteenth century the farm managers 
of lay lords were almost all illiterates who kept records through an elaborate 
set of marks. Shrewd farmers though they may have been, they were in no 
position to benefit from any improvement in production methods that they 
could not invent themselves or see with their own eyes. The Church was 
therefore essential to improving the quality of grains, fruits, and breeding 
stock. Because of its extensive holdings spread over the entire European 
continent, the Church could send the most productive seed and breeding 
stock to areas where output lagged. The demand for sacramental wine in 
Northern Europe led monks to experiment with hardier varieties of grape 


92 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


that could survive in colder climates. The Church also helped raise the 
productivity of medieval farming in other ways. Many of the uneconomically 
small plots donated to the Church during the feudal revolution were recon- 
figured to make them easier to farm. The Church also provided ancillary 
services required by small farming communities. In many areas, Church- 
owned mills ground grain into flour. 

4. The Church undertook many functions that are today absorbed by 
government, including the provision of public infrastructure. This is part of 
the way that the Church helped overcome what economists call “public 
goods dilemmas” in an era of fragmented authority. Specific religious orders 
of the early-medieval Church devoted themselves to applied engineering 
tasks, like opening roads, rebuilding fallen bridges, and repairing dilapidated 
Roman aqueducts. They also cleared land, built dams, and drained swamps. 
A new monastic order, the Carthusians, dug the first “artesian” weil in 
Artois, France. Using percussion drilling, they dug a small hole deep enough 
to create a well that needed no pump.*° The Cistercian Order undertook to 
build and maintain precarious seawalls and dikes in the Low Countries of 
Europe. Farmers deeded land to Cistercian monasteries and then leased it 
back, while the monks undertook full responsibility for upkeep and repairs. 
Cistercians also took the lead in developing water-powered machines, which 
were adopted to such widespread uses as “pounding, lifting, grinding, and 
pressing.” >? The monastery of Clairvaux dug a two-mile-long canal from 
the River Aube.** The Church also intervened to build new roads and bridges 
where population centers had shifted outside the range of the old Roman 
garrison roads. Bishops granted indulgences to local lords who would build 
or repair river crossings and maintain hospices for travelers. An order of 
monks established by St. Bénezet, the Fréres Pontifes, or “Brothers of the 
Bridge,” built several of the longest bridges then existing, including the 
Pont d’Avignon, a massive twenty-arch structure over the Rhone with a 
combination chapel and tollbooth at one end. Even London Bridge, which 
stood until the nineteenth century, was constructed by a chaplain and fi- 
nanced in part by a contribution of 1,000 marks from the papal legate.*? 

5. The Church also helped incubate a more complex market. Cathedral 
construction, for example, differs in kind from public infrastructure, like 
bridges and aqueducts. In principle, at least, Church structures were used 
only for religious services and not as thoroughfares for commerce. Yet it 
should not be forgotten that construction of churches and cathedrals helped 
create and deepen markets for many artisanal and engineering skills. In the 
same way that military spending of the nation-state during the Cold War 
unintentionally helped incubate the Internet, so the building of medieval 
cathedrals led to spin-offs of other kinds, the incubation of commerce. The 
Church was a principal customer of the building trades and artisans. Church 


East of Eden 93 


purchases of silver for communion services, candelabra, and artworks to 
decorate churches helped to create a market for luxury goods that otherwise 
would not have existed. 

In many ways, the Church helped to temper the ferocity of violence 
unleashed by armed knights during and after the “feudal revolution.” Espe- 
cially in the early centuries of feudalism, the Church contributed signifi- 
cantly to improving the productivity of the farming economy. It was an 
essential institution, well fitted to the needs of agrarian society at the close 
of the Dark Ages. 


Vulnerability to Violence 


In “[t]hirty or forty years of violent disturbances, the feudal revolution of 
the year 1000,” *° like the fall of Rome five centuries earlier, was a unique 
event, caused by a complex interplay of influences. Yet in one respect, the 
triumph of mali homines (wicked men) and the oppressions they wrought 
perfectly reflect the essential vulnerability of agricultural society to violence. 
In contrast to the foraging phase of human existence, farming introduced a 
quantum leap in organized violence and oppression. 

From the very earliest, this was reflected in the more militant cultures of 
farming peoples. The gods of the early agricultural societies were gods of 
rainfall and flooding, whose functions reflected the preoccupations of those 
societies with factors that determined crop yields. The sender of rain or 
water was also often the god of war, invoked by the earliest kings, who were, 
above all else, warlords.*! 

The close connection between farming and warfare was reflected in the 
religious imagination of people whose lives were transformed by the innova- 
tions of the agricultural revolution. The expulsion from the Garden of Eden 
can be seen as a figurative account of the transformation of society from 
foraging to farming, from a free life with food picked from nature’s bounty 
with little work to a life of hard labor. 


PARADISE LOST 


Farming set humanity on an entirely new course. The first farmers truly 
planted the seeds of civilization. From their toil came cities, armies, arithme- 
tic, astronomy, dungeons, wine and whiskey, the written word, kings, slavery, 
and war. Yet notwithstanding all the drama that farming was to add to life, 
the shift away from the primeval economy appears to have been roundly 
unpopular from its earliest days. Witness the account preserved in the Book 
of Genesis, which tells the story of the expulsion from paradise. The biblical 


94 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


parable of the Garden of Eden is a fond recollection of the life of ease 
enjoyed by the forager in the wilderness. Scholars indicate that the word 
“Eden” appears to be derived from a Sumerian word for “wilderness.” 4 

The transition from a free and sparsely settled life in the wild to a seden- 
tary life in a farming village was a matter of deep regret, expressed not only 
in the Bible but also in humankind’s continuing grudge against getting up in 
the morning and going to work. As Stephen Boyden wrote in Western Civili- 
zation in Biological Perspective, the new way of living that accompanied 
farming was “evodeviant.”* Prior to the advent of farming, thousands of 
human generations lived as Adam did in Eden, at the invitation of his Maker: 
“Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat.” Hunters and gatherers 
had no crops to tend, no herd to watch, no taxes to pay. Like hoboes, foragers 
drifted where they pleased, worked little, and answered to no one. 

With farming, a new way of life began, and on altogether more pressing 
terms. “Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt 
eat the herb of the field; In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.” 
Farming was hard work. The memory of life before farming was that of 
paradise lost. 

More than they could have imagined, farmers created new conditions that 
drastically altered the logic of violence. It is not a coincidence that the Book 
of Genesis makes Cain, the first murderer, “a tiller of the ground.” Indeed, 
it is part of the uncanny prophetic power of the Bible that its story was 
entrusted to shepherds who readily understood how farming gave leverage 
to violence. In a few verses the biblical account encapsulates logic that took 
thousands of years to play out. Farming was an incubator of disputes. Farm- 
ing created stationary capital on an extensive scale, raising the payoff from 
violence and dramatically increasing the challenge of protecting assets. 
Farming made both crime and government paying propositions for the first 
time. 


CHAPTER 4 


THE LAGT WAYo 
UF POLE 


Parallels Between the Senile 
Decline of the Holy Mother Church 
and the Nanny State 


“I also believe—and hope—that politics and economics will cease to 
be as important in the future as they have been in the past; the time will 
come when most of our present controversies on these matters will seem 
as trivial, or as meaningless, as the theological debates in which the 
keenest minds of the Middle Ages dissipated their energies.” 


—ARTHUR C. CLARKE 


To speak of the coming death of politics is bound to seem ridiculous or 
optimistic, depending on your disposition. Yet that is what the Information 
Revolution is likely to bring. For readers reared in a century saturated in 
politics, the idea that life could proceed without it may seem fanciful, the 
equivalent to claiming that one could live merely by absorbing nutrients 
from the air. Yet politics in the modern sense, as the preoccupation with 
controlling and rationalizing the power of the state, is mostly a modern 
invention. We believe it will end with the modern world just as the tangle of 
feudal duties and obligations that engrossed the attentions of people in the 
Middle Ages ended with the Middle Ages. During the feudal period, as 


96 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


historian Martin van Creveld points out, “politics did not exist (the very 
concept had yet to be invented, and dates back only to the sixteenth cen- 
tury), 

The thought that politics, as we now know it, did not exist prior to the 
modern period may seem surprising, especially given that Aristotle had 
written an essay of that title in the days of Alexander the Great. But look 
closely. Words used in ancient texts are not necessarily contemporary con- 
cepts. Aristotle also wrote an essay entitled Sophistical Refutations, a term 
about as meaningless today as Politics was in the Middle Ages. The word 
simply was not in use. Its first known appearance in English dates to 1529.° 
Even then, “politics” appears to have been a pejorative, derived from an Old 
French word, politique, used to describe “opportunists and temporizers.” 4 

It took almost two thousand years for Aristotle’s latent concept to emerge 
with the meaning we now know. Why? Before the modern world could put 
Aristotle’s word to a meaningful use, megapolitical conditions were required 
that dramatically raised the returns to violence. The Gunpowder Revolution, 
which we analyzed in The Great Reckoning, did just that. It raised the returns 
to violence far above what they had ever been. This made the question of 
who controlled the state more important than it had ever been. Logically and 
inevitably, politics emerged from the struggle to control the sharply in- 
creased spoils of power. 

Politics began five centuries ago with the early stages of industrialism. 
Now it is dying. A widespread revulsion against politics and politicians is 
sweeping the world. You see it in news and speculation on the hidden details 
of Whitewater, and the poorly disguised murder of Vincent Foster. You see 
it in numerous other scandals touching President Bill Clinton. You see in it 
reports of embezzlement by leading congressmen from the House Post Of- 
fice. You see it in scandals leading to resignations in John Major’s circle, 
and similar scandals in France, reaching two recent prime ministers, Eduard 
Balladur and Alain Juppe. Even larger scandals have been revealed in Italy, 
where seven-time prime minister Giulio Andreotti was brought to the dock 
to stand trail on charges that included links to the Mafia and ordering the 
murder of Mino Pecorelli, an investigative journalist. Still other scandals 
have tarnished the reputation of Spanish prime minister Filipe Gonzales. 
Corruption allegations cost four Japanese prime ministers their jobs in the 
first five years of the 1990s. Canada’s Justice Department alleged in a letter 
to Swiss authorities that former prime minister Brian Mulroney had received 
kickbacks on a C$1.8 billion sale of Airbus planes to Air Canada.> Willy 
Claes, the secretary-general of NATO, was forced to resign under a cloud of 
corruption allegations. Even in Sweden, Mona Sahlin, a deputy prime minis- 
ter and presumptive prime minister, was forced to resign in the face of 
allegations that she used government credit cards to purchase diapers and 


The Last Days of Politics 97 


other household goods. Almost everywhere you turn in countries with ma- 
ture welfare states once thought of as well governed, people hate their 
political leaders. 


Disdain as a Leading Indicator 


Moral outrage against corrupt leaders is not an isolated historical phenome- 
non but a common precursor of change. It happens again and again whenever 
one era gives way to another. Whenever technological change has divorced 
the old forms from the new moving forces of the economy, moral standards 
shift, and people begin to treat those in command of the old institutions with 
growing disdain. This widespread revulsion comes into evidence well before 
people develop a new coherent ideology of change. As we write, there is as 
yet little evidence of an articulate rejection of politics. That will come later. 
It has not yet occurred to most of your contemporaries that a life without 
politics is possible. What we have in the final years of the twentieth century 
is inarticulate disdain. 

Something similar happened in the late fifteenth century, but at that time it 
was religion rather than politics that was in the process of being downsized. 
Notwithstanding popular belief in “the sacredness of the sacerdotal office,” ° 
both the higher and lower ranks of clergy were held in the utmost contempt 
—not unlike the popular attitude toward politicians and bureaucrats today. It 
was widely believed that the upper clergy were corrupt, worldly, and venal. 
And not without reason. Several fifteenth-century popes openly sported bas- 
tards. The lower clergy were held in even lower esteem as they proliferated 
in country and town, begging for alms and frequently offering to sell God’s 
grace and the forgiveness of sins to anyone who would put cash into the 
bargain. 

Beneath the “crust of superficial piety” ’ was a corrupt and increasingly 
dysfunctional system. Many lost respect for those who ran it, long before 
anyone dared to say that it did not work. A life saturated with religion, 
making no distinction between the spiritual and the temporal, had exhausted 
its possibilities. Its end was inevitable long before Luther nailed his 95 
theses on the church door at Wittenberg. 


A SECULAR REFORMATION 


We believe that the reaction against saturation politics is following a similar 
path. The death of the Soviet Union and the repudiation of socialism are 
part of a broad pattern of depoliticization sweeping the world. This is now 
most evident in a growing contempt for those who run the world’s govern- 


98 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


ments. It is driven only in part by the realization that they are corrupt, and 
prone to sell “indulgences” from political difficulty in exchange for cam- 
paign contributions or special help on commodity trades to subvene their 
personal finances. 

The reaction against politicians is also motivated by the widening realiza- 
tion that much of what they do at great cost is futile, in the same way that 
organizing another pilgrimage of penitents to march barefoot in the snow, or 
the founding of yet another order of mendicant monks in the late fifteenth 
century, could have done little to improve productivity or relieve pressures 
on living standards. 


The Last Days of the Holy Mother Church 


At the end of the Middle Ages, the monolithic Church as an institution had 
grown senile and counterproductive, a marked change from its positive 
economic contribution five centuries earlier. As we explored in the last 
chapter, the Church played a leading role at the end of the tenth century in 
establishing order and facilitating economic recovery from the anarchy that 
marked the close of the Dark Ages. At that time, the Church was indispens- 
able to the survival of large numbers of small freeholders and serfs who 
made up the bulk of the Western European population. By the end of the 
fifteenth century, the Church had become a major drag upon productivity. 
The burdens it imposed upon the population were pushing living standards 
down. 

Much the same thing can be said of the nation-state today. It was a 
necessary adaptation to the new megapolitical conditions created by the 
Gunpowder Revolution five centuries ago. The nation-state widened the 
scope of markets and displaced fragmented local authorities at a time when 
more encompassing trading areas brought large returns. The fact that mer- 
chants almost everywhere in Europe spontaneously allied themselves to the 
monarch at the center as he maneuvered to consolidate authority is itself 
telling evidence that the nation-state in its early form was good for business. 
It helped lift the burdens on commerce imposed by feudal landlords and 
local magnates. 

In a world where returns to violence were high and rising, the nation-state 
was a useful institution. But five centuries later, as this millennium draws to 
a close, megapolitical conditions have changed. Returns to violence are 
falling, and the nation-state, like the Church at the twilight of the Middle 
Ages, is an anachronism that has become a drag on growth and productivity. 

Like the Church then, the nation-state today has exhausted its possibilities. 
It is bankrupt, an institution grown to a senile extreme. Like the Church 
then, it has served as the dominant form of social organization for five 


The Last Days of Politics 99 


centuries. Having outlived the conditions that brought it into existence, it is 
ripe for a fall. And fall it will. Technology is precipitating a revolution in 
the exercise of power that will destroy the nation-state just as assuredly as 
gunpowder weapons and the printing press destroyed the monopoly of the 
medieval Church. 

If our reasoning is correct, the nation-state will be replaced by new forms 
of sovereignty, some of them unique in history, some reminiscent of the 
city-states and medieval merchant republics of the premodern world. What 
was old will be new after the year 2000. And what was unimaginable will 
be commonplace. As the scale of technology plunges, governments will find 
that they must compete like corporations for income, charging no more for 
their services than they are worth to the people who pay for them. The full 
implications of this change are all but unimaginable. 


THEN AND Now 


Something similar might have been said five hundred years ago, at the turn 
of the fifteenth century. Then as now, Western civilization stood at the 
threshold of a momentous transformation. Although almost no one knew it, 
medieval society was dying. Its death was neither widely anticipated nor 
understood. Nonetheless, the prevailing mood was one of deep gloom. This 
is common at the end of an era, as conventional thinkers sense that things 
are falling apart, that “the falcon cannot hear the falconer.” Yet their mental 
inertia is often too great to comprehend the implications of the emerging 
configurations of power. Medieval historian Johan Huizinga wrote of the 
waning days of the Middle Ages, “The chroniclers of the fifteenth century 
have, nearly all, been the dupes of an absolute misappreciation of their times, 
of which the real moving forces escaped their attention.” ° 


Myths Betrayed 


Major changes in the underlying dynamics of power tend to confound con- 
ventional thinkers because they expose myths that rationalize the old order 
but lack any real explanatory power. At the end of the Middle Ages, as now, 
there was a particularly wide gap between the received myths and reality. As 
Huizinga said of the Europeans in the late fifteenth century, “Their whole 
system of ideas was permeated by the fiction that chivalry ruled the world.” ° 
This has a close second in the contemporary assumption that it is ruled by 
votes and popularity contests. Neither proposition stands up to close scru- 
tiny. Indeed, the idea that the course of history is determined by democratic 


100 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


tallies of wishes is every bit as silly as the medieval notion that it is deter- 
mined by an elaborated code of manners called chivalry. 

The fact that saying so borders on heresy suggests how divorced conven- 
tional thinking is from a realistic grasp of the dynamics of power in late 
industrial society. It is an issue we examine closely in this book. In our view, 
voting was an effect rather than a cause of the megapolitical conditions that 
brought forth the modern nation-state. Mass democracy and the concept of 
citizenship flourished as the nation-state grew. They will falter as the nation- 
state falters, causing every bit as much dismay in Washington as the ero- 
sion of chivalry caused in the court of the duke of Burgundy five hundred 
years ago. 


PARALLELS BETWEEN CHIVALRY AND CITIZENSHIP 


If you can understand how and why the importance of chivalric oaths faded 
away with the transition to an industrial organization of society, you will be 
better positioned to see how citizenship as we now know it could fade away 
in the Information Age. Both served a similar function. They facilitated the 
exercise of power under two quite different sets of megapolitical conditions. 

Feudal oaths prevailed at a time when defensive technology was para- 
mount, sovereignties were fragmented, and private individuals and corporate 
bodies exercised military power in their own right. Before the Gunpowder 
Revolution, wars had normally been fought by small contingents of armed 
men. Even the most powerful monarchs did not have militum perpetuum, or 
standing armies. They drew their military support from their vassals, the 
greater lords, who in turn drew upon their vassals, the lesser lords, who in 
turn drew upon their vassals, the knights. The whole chain of allegiance 
carried down the hierarchy to the person of the meanest social standing who 
was considered worthy to bear arms. 


Uniforms or Divergences? 


Unlike a modern army, a medieval army before the rise of citizenship did 
not march on the field of battle outfitted in uniforms. To the contrary, each 
retainer or vassal, each knight, baronet, or lord of different degree had his 
own distinctive livery that reflected his place in the hierarchy. Instead of 
uniforms, there were divergences that emphasized the vertical structure of 
society in which each station was different. As Huizinga said, medieval 
warriors were distinguished by “outward signs of... divergences: liveries, 
colors, badges, party cries.” !° 

Nor were wars fought only. by governments or nations. As Martin van 


The Last Days of Politics 101 


Creveld has pointed out, modern notions of war, as stylized by strategists 
like Carl von Clausewitz, misrepresent the reality of premodern conflict. 
Van Creveld writes: 


For a thousand years after the fall of Rome, armed conflict was waged by 
different kinds of social entities. Among them were barbarian tribes, the 
Church, feudal barons of every rank, free cities, even private individuals. Nor 
were the “armies” of the period anything like those we know today; indeed, it 
is difficult to find a word that will do them justice. War was waged by shoals 
of retainers who donned military garb and followed their lord."! 


Under such conditions, it was obviously crucial to the lord that his retainers 
actually “donned their military garb and followed.” Hence the heavy empha- 
sis placed upon the chivalric oath. 

The honor of the medieval knight and the duty of the conscript soldier 
served parallel functions. The medieval man was bound by oaths to individu- 
als and the Church in much the way that moderns are bound by citizenship 
to the nation-state. Violating an oath was the medieval equivalent of treason. 
People in late-medieval times went to extremes to avoid violating oaths, just 
as millions of modern citizens went to extremes in the World Wars, charging 
machine-gun nests to fulfill their duties as citizens. 

Both chivalry and citizenship added an extra dimension to the simple 
calculus that would otherwise deter unindoctrinated human beings from 
going onto a battlefield and staying there when the going got rough. Chivalry 
and citizenship both led people to kill and to risk death. Only demanding 
and exaggerated values that are strongly reinforced by leading institutions 
can serve that function. 


Circumventing Cost-Benefit Analysis 


The success and survival of any system depends upon its capacity to marshal 
military effort in times of conflict and crisis. Obviously, the decision on the 
part of a medieval knight or a private in the trenches in World War I to risk 
his life in battle was not likely to be informed by a sober, cost-benefit 
calculation. Seldom are wars so easily fought, or do rewards for those who 
bear the brunt of the fighting so far overshadow the possible costs that an 
army of economic optimizers could be recruited to rush out to the battlefield. 
Almost every war and, indeed, most battles have moments in which the tide 
could turn on a heartbeat. As students of military history are well aware, the 
difference between defeat and victory is often told by the valor, bravery, and 
ferocity with which individual soldiers take up their task. If the men doing 
the fighting are not willing to die over a piece of ground that would not be 


102 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


worth a fig once the battle stops, then they probably will not prevail against 
an otherwise evenly matched foe. 

This has important implications. The more effective sovereignties are in 
limiting defections and encouraging military effort, the more likely they are 
to prevail militarily. In warfare, the most useful value systems induce people 
to behave in ways that short-term rational calculation would rule out. No 
organization could mobilize military power effectively if the individuals it 
sent into battle felt free to calculate where their own best advantage lay, and 
join in the fight or run away accordingly. If so, they would almost never 
fight. Only under the most propitious circumstances, or the most desperate, 
would the rational person care to engage in a potentially lethal battle based 
upon short-term cost-benefit analysis. Perhaps Homo economicus might fight 
on a sunny day, when the forces on his side were overwhelming, the enemy 
weak, and the potential rewards of battle enticing. Perhaps. He might also 
fight if backed into a corner by marauding cannibals. 

But those are extreme circumstances. What of the more common con- 
ditions of warfare, which are neither so attractive that they would pass 
the scrutiny of cost-benefit analysis nor so desperate that they afford no 
way out? It is here that concepts like chivalry and citizenship are impor- 
tant contributors to the successful use of military power. Long before a 
battle begins, predominant organizations must convince individuals that up- 
holding certain duties to the lord, or the nation-state, are more important 
than life itself. The myths and rationalizations that societies employ 
to encourage risk-taking on the battlefield are a key part of their military 
prowess. 

To be effective, these myths must be tailored to the prevailing megapoliti- 
cal conditions. The fiction that chivalry rules the world means nothing today, 
especially in a city like New York. But it was the cherished myth of feudal- 
ism. It justified and rationalized the ties of obligation that bound everyone 
under the domination of the Church and a warlike nobility. At a time when 
private wars of covetousness were commonplace,’ the exercise of power and 
the very survival of individuals depended upon the willingness of others to 
fulfill their promises of military service under conditions of duress. It was 
obviously crucial that those promises be dependable. 


Before Nationality 


Unlike today, the concept of nationality played little or no role in establishing 
sovereignty in the Middle Ages. Monarchs, as well as some princes of the 
Church and powerful lords, possessed territories by private right. In a way 
that has no modern analogy, these lords could sell or give away territories or 
acquire new ones by conveyance or marriage as well as by conquest. Today, 


The Last Days of Politics 103 


you could hardly imagine the United States falling under the sovereignty of 
a non-English-speaking Portuguese president because he happened to marry 
the former American president’s daughter. Yet something similar was com- 
monplace in medieval Europe. Power passed by hereditary descent. Cities 
and countries changed sovereigns the way that antiques change owners. In 
many cases, sovereigns were not native to the regions in which their proper- 
ties lay. Sometimes they did not speak the local language, or spoke it badly 
with heavy accents. But it made little difference to the ties of personal 
obligation whether a Spaniard was king of Athens, or an Austrian was king 
of Spain. 


Corporate Sovereignty 


Sovereignty was also exercised by religious corporations like the Knights 
Templar, the Knights of St. John, the Teutonic Knights, and the Knights of 
Malta. While the Knights of Malta still exist and as we write are poised to 
recover sovereignty over Fort St. Angelo in Malta, such hybrid institutions 
have had no modern counterparts. They combined religious, social, judicial, 
and financial activities with sovereignty over localities.!3 While they exer- 
cised territorial jurisdiction, they were almost the opposite of today’s govern- 
ments in that nationality played no role in the mobilization of their support 
or their scheme of governance. The members and officers of these religious 
orders were drawn from all parts of Christian Europe, or “Christendom,” as 
it was known. 

No one thought it appropriate or necessary that those who ruled be drawn 
from the local populations. The mobilization of support in the fragmented 
medieval scheme of governance did not depend upon a national identity or 
duty to the state, as in modern times, but upon personal loyalty and custom- 
ary ties that had to be upheld as a matter of personal honor. Oaths to uphold 
these duties could be sworn by anyone from anywhere provided he was 
otherwise deemed worthy by his station in life. 


The Vow 


Chivalric vows bound individuals to one another and were sworn on the 
honor of those who were parties to them. As Huizinga wrote, “in making a 
vow, people imposed some privation upon themselves as a spur to accom- 
plishment of the actions they were pledged to perform.” '* So much impor- 
tance was placed upon honoring vows that people frequently risked death or 
suffered serious privations in order to avoid breaking their vows. Often, the 
oaths themselves bound individuals to perform as matters of honor acts that 
would probably seem ludicrous to you and most readers of this book. 


104 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


For example, the Knights of the Star swore an oath never to retire “more 
than four acres from the battlefield, through which rule soon afterwards 
more than ninety of them lost their lives.” !° The prohibition on even tactical 
retreat is irrational as a military strategy. But it was a common imperative of 
the chivalric vows. Before the Battle of Agincourt, the king of England 
issued an order that knights on patrol should remove their armor, on grounds 
that it would have been incompatible with their honor to withdraw 
from enemy lines if they were wearing their coat armor. It so happened 
that the king himself got lost and passed by the village that had been night 
quarters for the vanguard of his army. Since he was wearing armor, 
his chivalric honor forbade him to simply turn around when he discovered 
his mistake and return to the village. He spent the night in an exposed 
position. 

As silly as this example seems, King Henry probably did not miscalculate 
in thinking that he would have risked more in trespassing his honor by 
retreating, and thus setting a demoralizing example for his entire army, than 
he did by sleeping behind enemy lines. 

The history of the Middle Ages is filled with examples of prominent 
people fulfilling pledges that would seem ridiculous to us. In many cases, 
the actions proposed involved no objective connection to any benefit other 
than a vivid demonstration of the importance those undertaking them placed 
upon the vow itself. Among the common vows: to keep one eye closed, to 
eat and drink only when standing, and to become a self-imposed cripple by 
entering a one-person chain gang. There was a widespread custom of wear- 
ing painful foot irons. If today you saw someone struggling along the street 
in a heavy leg iron, you would probably assume that he was insane, not that 
he was a man of great virtue. Yet in the context of chivalry, willingly donning 
such a device was a badge of honor. And there were many similar customs 
that would seem equally ludicrous today. As Huizinga describes it, many 
took a pledge “not to sleep in a bed on Saturday, not to take animal food on 
Friday, etc. One act of asceticism is heaped upon another: one nobleman 
promises to wear no armor, to drink no wine one day in every week, not to 
sleep in a bed, not to sit down to meals, to wear the hair shirt.” ! 

Lent survives as a much moderated version of this self-imposed discom- 
fort. 

Many enthusiasts for vows formed orders that placed particularly difficult 
privations on their members as tests of honor. The Order of Galois and 
Galoises, for example, dressed during summers in “furs and fur-lined hoods 
and lighted a fire in the hearth, whereas in winter they were only allowed to 
wear a simple coat without fur; neither mantles, not hats, nor gloves, and 
had only very light bed clothes.” As Huizinga reports, “It is not surprising 
that a great many members died of cold.” 


The Last Days of Politics 105 


“Medieval self-flagellation was a grim torture which people inflicted on them- 
selves in the hope of inducing a judging and punishing God to put away his 
rod, to forgive their sins, to spare them the greater chastisements which would 
otherwise be theirs in this life and the next.” * 


——NORMAN COHN 


Flagellation, Then and Now 


It was a short step from the vow that imposed danger and privation to 
ordeals, pilgrimages, mortification, discomfort, and even purposefully self- 
inflicted injury. These could be seen as highly beneficial and praiseworthy 
in the medieval period. They were gestures of the seriousness with which 
vows were held, a logic that is not entirely foreign even today to fraternity 
or sorority initiations. 

Stifling in summer, freezing in winter, or walking in barefoot pilgrimages 
in the snow was relatively tame compared to “the grim torture” of self- 
flagellation. This was a particularly medieval form of penance that came into 
being almost exactly at the same time feudalism began. It was first “adopted 
by hermits in the monastic communities of Camaldoli and Fonte Avellana 
early in the eleventh century.” '° 

Rather than just walking barefoot in cold weather, flagellants organized 
processions in which they would march day and night, from one town to the 
next. “And each time they came to a town they would arrange themselves in 
groups before the church and flog themselves for hours on end.” 7° 

We believe that people in the future who look back at the era of the 
nation-state will find some of the undertakings done in the twentieth century 
in the name of citizenship as ludicrous as we consider self-flagellation. From 
the vantage point of the Information Society, the spectacle of soldiers in the 
modern period traveling halfway around the world to entertain death out of 
loyalty to the nation-state will come to be seen as grotesque and silly. It will 
seem not far different from some of the extraordinary and exaggerated rites 
of chivalry, like walking about in leg irons, which otherwise sensible people 
took pride in doing during the feudal period. 


Chivalry Yields to Citizenship 


Chivalry faded away, to be replaced by citizenship, when megapolitical 
conditions changed and the military purpose of the vow to one’s lord was 
antiquated. The world of gunpowder weapons and industrial armies involved 
very different relations between the individuals who did the fighting and 


106 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


their commanders. Citizenship emerged when returns to violence were high 
and rising, and the state had vastly greater resources than the social entities 
that waged war in the medieval period. Because of its great power and 
wealth, the nation-state could strike a bargain directly with the mass of 
common soldiers who fought in its uniform. 

Such bargains proved to be far cheaper to the state and much less trouble- 
some than attempts to assemble military forces by negotiating with powerful 
lords and local notables, each of whom was capable of resisting demands 
that ran counter to his interests as no individual citizen in the nation-state 
conceivably could. 

For reasons we explore at greater depth later, citizenship crucially de- 
pended upon the fact that no individual or small group of individuals 
was megapolitically capable of exercising military power independently. 
As information technology alters the logic of battle, it will antiquate the 
myths of citizenship just as assuredly as gunpowder antiquated medieval 
chivalry. 


Hell’s Angels on Horseback 


The aristocracy of mounted warriors that dominated Western Europe for 
centuries were hardly the gentlemen their descendants became. They were 
rough and violent. In today’s terms they could be better understood as the 
medieval equivalent of motorcycle gangs. The rules of manners and pre- 
tenses of chivalry served more to temper their excesses than as a description 
of the way they really behaved. Even an encyclopedic account of the rules 
and obligations of chivalry would have revealed little or nothing about the 
foundations of the nobility’s power. 


Perfection as a Synonym for Exhaustion 


The advent of effective gunpowder weapons at the end of the fifteenth 
century detonated a powerful blast under their feet—yjust as armed knights 
had perfected their art as never before. By then, careful breeding had finally 
produced a battle horse sixteen hands high, a steed with the stature to 
carry comfortably a mounted knight in full armor. Yet “perfection,” as C. 
Northcote Parkinson shrewdly noted, “is achieved only by institutions on 
the point of collapse.” 7! Just as the new warhorse was perfected, new weap- 
ons were deployed to blast horse and knight from the battlefield. These new 
gunpowder weapons could be fired by commoners. They required little skill 
to use but were expensive to procure in quantity. Their proliferation steadily 
increased the importance of commerce as compared to agriculture, which 
had been the foundation of the feudal economy. 


The Last Days of Politics 107 


War at a Higher Scale 


How did gunpowder weapons precipitate such a transformation? For one 
thing, they raised the scale of fighting, which meant that waging war soon 
became far more costly than it had been during the medieval period. Before 
the Gunpowder Revolution, wars had normally been fought by groups so small 
that they could be levied over a small and poor territory. Gunpowder gave a 
new advantage to fighting on a larger scale. Only leaders with claims on rich 
subjects could afford to field effective forces under the new conditions. Those 
leaders who best accommodated the growth of commerce, usually monarchs 
who allied themselves with the urban merchants, found that they enjoyed a 
competitive advantage on the battlefield. In van Creveld’s words, “thanks in 
part to the superior financial resources at their disposal, they could purchase 
more cannon than anybody else and blast the opposition to pieces.” 74 

Even though it would be centuries before the full logic of gunpowder 
weapons would be unleashed in the citizen armies of the French Revolution, 
an early hint of the transformation of warfare by gunpowder was the adop- 
tion of military uniforms in the Renaissance. The uniforms aptly symbolize 
the new relations between the warrior and the nation-state that went hand in 
hand with the transition from chivalry to citizenship. In effect, the new 
nation-state would strike a “uniform” bargain with its citizens, unlike the 
special, divergent bargains struck by the monarch or the pope with a long 
chain of vassals under feudalism. In the old system, everyone had a different 
place in an architectonic hierarchy. Everyone had a bargain as unique as his 
coat of arms and the colorful pennants he flew. 


Lowering the Opportunity Costs of Riches 


Gunpowder weapons radically altered the nature of society in yet another 
way. They separated the exercise of power from physical strength, thereby 
lowering the opportunity costs of mercantile activity. Rich merchants no 
longer had to depend upon their own finesse and strength in hand-to-hand 
combat or on mercenaries of uncertain loyalty to defend themselves. They 
could hope to be defended by the new, larger armies of the great monarchs. 
As William Playfair said of the Middle Ages, ‘“‘While human force was the 
power by which men were annoyed, in cases of hostility, . . . [t]o be wealthy 
and powerful long together was then impossible.” 2? When gunpowder came 
along, it was impossible to be powerful without being rich. 


108 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Status and Static Understanding 


For many of the same reasons that most people today are ill-prepared to 
anticipate the new dynamics of the Information Society, the leading thinkers 
of medieval society were unable to anticipate or understand the rise of 
commerce that played so important a part in shaping the modern period. 
Most people five centuries ago viewed their changing society in static terms. 
As Huizinga said, “Very little property is, in the modern sense, liquid, while 
power is not yet associated predominantly with money; it is still rather 
inherent in the person and depends on a sort of religious awe which he 
inspires; it makes itself felt by pomp and magnificence, or a numerous train 
of faithful followers. Feudal or hierarchic thought expresses the idea of 
grandeur by visible signs. ...”?4 Because people in the late Middle Ages 
thought before all else of status, they were ill-prepared to comprehend that 
merchants could possibly contribute anything of importance to the life of 
the realm. Almost without exception, merchants were commoners. They fit 
at the bottom of the three estates, below the nobility and the clergy. 

Even the more perceptive thinkers of late-medieval society failed to ap- 
preciate the importance of commerce and other forms of enterprise outside 
of farming for accumulating wealth. To them, poverty was an apostolic 
virtue. They literally made no distinction between a wealthy banker and a 
beggar. In Huizinga’s words, “No distinction in principle was made in the 
third estate, between rich and poor citizens, nor between townsmen and 
country-people.” ** Neither occupation nor wealth mattered in their scheme, 
merely chivalric status. 

This blindness to the economic dimension of life was reinforced by 
churchmen, who were the ideological guardians of medieval life. They were 
so far from grasping the importance of commerce that one widely applauded 
fifteenth-century reform program proposed that all persons of nonnoble 
status be required to devote themselves exclusively to handicrafts or farm 
labor. No role was contemplated for commerce whatsoever.” 


“The date 1492, conventionally used to separate medieval from modern his- 
tory, serves as well as any other dividing point, for in the perspective of world 
history, Columbus's voyage symbolizes the beginning of a new relationship 
between Western Europe and the rest of the world.’ 


—FREDERIC C. LANE 


The Last Days of Politics 109 


THE BIRTH OF THE INDUSTRIAL AGE 


Many of the keenest minds of the fifteenth century totally missed one of the 
more important developments in history, one that began under their eyes. 
The eclipse of feudalism marked the onset of the great modern phase of 
Western predominance. It was a period of rising returns to violence and 
rising scale in enterprise. For the past two and a half centuries, the modern 
economy has delivered an unparalleled rise in living standards for that frac- 
tion of the world that enjoyed its greatest benefits. The catalysts for these 
changes were new technologies, from gunpowder weapons to the printing 
press, which changed the boundaries of life in ways that few could grasp. 

By the final decade of the fifteenth century, explorers like Columbus were 
just beginning to open an approach to vast, unknown continents. For the first 
time in the immemorial ages of human existence, the whole world was 
compassed. Galleons, new high-masted improvisations on Mediterranean 
galleys, circumnavigated the globe, charting the passages that were to be- 
come trade routes and thoroughfares for disease and conquest. Conquista- 
dors wielding their new bronze cannon on sea and on shore blasted open 
new horizons. They found fortunes in gold and spices, planted the seeds of 
new cash crops, from tobacco to potatoes, and staked out new grazing lands 
for their cattle. 


The First Industrial Technology 


Just as the cannon was opening new economic horizons, the printing press 
opened new intellectual horizons. It was the first machine of mass produc- 
tion, a signature technology that marked the onset of industrialism. In saying 
this, we share the view advanced by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations 
that the Industrial Revolution had already happened well before he wrote. 
It had not reached maturity, to be sure, but the principles of mass production 
and the factory system were well established. His famous example of the 
pin manufacturers makes this case. Smith explains how eighteen separate 
operations are employed to produce pins. Because of specialized technology 
and the division of labor, each employee could make 4,800 times more pins 
in a day than an individual could fabricate on his own.?8 

Smith’s example underscores the fact that the Industrial Revolution began 
centuries earlier than historians conventionally assume. Most textbooks 
would date its origins to the middle of the eighteenth century. That is not 
unreasonable as a date for the takeoff stage in the improvement of living 
standards. But the actual megapolitical transition between feudalism and 
industrialism began much earlier, at the end of the fifteenth century. Its 


110 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


impact was felt almost immediately in the transformation of dominant insti- 
tutions, particularly in the eclipse of the medieval Church. 

The historians who place the Industrial Revolution later are really measur- 
ing something else, the takeoff of living standards attributable to mass pro- 
duction powered by engines. This raised the value of unskilled labor and led 
to falling prices for a wide variety of consumer goods. Indeed, the fact that 
living standards began to rise sharply at different times in different countries 
is a tip-off that something other than the megapolitical transition is being 
measured. The Cambridge Economic History of Europe speaks of “Indus- 
trial Revolutions” in the plural, explicitly linking them to the sustained 
growth of national incomes.”’ In Japan and Russia, this income surge was 
delayed until the end of the nineteenth century. The rise in living standards 
and sustained growth of national income in other parts of Asia and some 
parts of Africa was a twentieth-century phenomenon. In some parts of Af- 
rica, sustained growth remains a dream to this day. But that does not mean 
that these regions are not living in the modern age. 


Falling Income in Transition 


The growth of income is not synonymous with the advent of industrialism. 
The shift to an industrial society was a megapolitical event, not measurable 
directly in income statistics. Indeed, real incomes for most Europeans fell 
for the first two centuries of the Industrial Age. They only began rising 
sometime after the beginning of the eighteenth century, and they did not 
recover to levels of 1250 until about 1750. We place the launch of the 
Industrial Age at the end of the fifteenth century. It was the industrial 
features of early-modern technology, including chemically powered weapons 
and printing presses, that precipitated the collapse of feudalism. 


Lowering the Cost of Knowledge 


The capacity to mass-produce books was incredibly subversive to medieval 
institutions, just as microtechnology will prove subversive to the modern 
nation-state. Printing rapidly undermined the Church’s monopoly on the 
word of God, even as it created a new market for heresy. Ideas inimical to 
the closed feudal society spread rapidly, as 10 million books were published 
by the final decade of the fifteenth century. Because the Church attempted 
to suppress the printing press, most of the new volumes were published in 
those areas of Europe where the writ of established authority was the weak- 
est. This may prove to be a close analogy with attempts by the U.S. govern- 
ment today to suppress encryption technology. The Church found that 


The Last Days of Politics 111 


censorship did not suppress the spread of subversive technology; it merely 
assured that it was put to its most subversive use. 


Depreciating the Monasteries 


Many apparently innocent uses of the printing press were subversive because 
of their content. Merely the spread of knowledge of the fortunes to be 
earned by intrepid adventurers and merchants was itself a powerful solvent 
dissolving the bonds of feudal obligation. The temptation of new markets, 
along with the need and opportunity to fund armies and navies on a larger 
scale, gave money a value it had lacked in the feudal centuries. These new 
avenues for investment, reinforced by powerful weapons that raised the 
returns to violence, made it increasingly costly to the lord in the hinterlands 
or the merchant in the city to donate his capital to the Church. Thus the very 
creation of investment opportunities outside of landholdings destabilized the 
institutions of feudalism and undercut its ideology. 

Another subversive consequence of the printing press was its effect 
in dramatically lowering the costs of reproducing information. A crucial 
reason why literacy and economic progress had been so minimal during the 
Middle Ages was the high cost of duplicating manuscripts by hand. As we 
have seen, one of the major productive functions assumed by the Church 
after the fall of Rome was reproducing books and manuscripts in Benedic- 
tine monasteries. This was an extremely costly undertaking. One of the more 
dramatic consequences of printing was to devalue the scriptoria, where 
monks labored day after day, month after month to produce manuscripts that 
could be duplicated in hours by printing presses. The new technology made 
the Benedictine scriptorium an obsolete and costly means of reproducing 
knowledge. This, in turn, made the religious orders and the Church that 
sustained the scribes less economically important. 

Mass production of books ended the Church’s monopoly on Scripture, as 
well as on other forms of information. The wider availability of books 
reduced the cost of literacy and thus multiplied the number of thinkers 
who were in a position to offer their own opinions on important subjects, 
particularly theological subjects. As theological historian Euan Cameron put 
it, “[a] series of publishing milestones” in the first two decades of the 
sixteenth century set the groundwork for the application of “modern text 
criticism to Scriptures.” *° This “threatened the monopoly” of the Church 
“by questioning corrupt readings of texts which had been used to support 
traditional dogmas.”*! This new knowledge encouraged the emergence of 
competitive Protestant sects who sought to formulate their own interpreta- 
tions of the Bible. Mass production of books lowered the cost of heresy and 
gave the heretics large audiences of readers. 


112 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Publishing also helped destroy the medieval worldview. The greater avail- 
ability and lower costs for information led to shifts away from a view of the 
world linked by symbolism rather than causal connections. “Symbolism’s 
image of the world is distinguished by impeccable order, architectonic struc- 
ture, hierarchic subordination. For each symbolic connexion implies a differ- 
ence of rank or sanctity. ... The walnut signifies Christ; the sweet kernel is 
His divine nature, the green and pulpy outer peel is His humanity, the 
wooden shell between is the cross. Thus all things raise the thoughts to the 
eternal... 7? 

A symbolic mode of thinking not only complemented a hierarchic struc- 
ture of society; it also suited illiteracy. Ideas conveyed by symbols in wood- 
cuts were accessible to an illiterate population. By contrast, the advent of 
printing in the modern period led to the development of causal connections, 
employing the scientific method, for a literate population. 


A PARALLEL FOR TODAY 


Medieval society, seemingly so stable and secure in its beliefs in the middle 
of the fifteenth century, was rapidly transformed. Its predominant institution, 
the Church, saw its monopoly challenged and shattered. Authority that had 
been unquestioned for centuries was suddenly in dispute. Beliefs and loyal- 
ties more sacred than those that bind any citizen to a nation-state today 
were reconsidered and renounced within a few short years, all because of a 
technological revolution that came into its own in the last decade of the 
fifteenth century. 2 

We believe that change as dramatic as that of five hundred years ago will 
happen again. The Information Revolution will destroy the monopoly of 
power of the nation-state as surely as the Gunpowder Revolution destroyed 
the Church’s monopoly. There is a striking analogy between the situation at 
the end of the fifteenth century, when life had become thoroughly saturated 
by organized religion, and that of today, when the world has become satu- 
rated with politics. The Church then and the nation-state today are both 
examples of institutions grown to a senile extreme. Like the late-medieval 
Church, the nation-state at the end of the twentieth century is a deeply 
indebted institution that can no longer pay its way. Its operations are ever 
more irrelevant and even counterproductive to the prosperity of those who 
not long ago might have been its staunchest supporters. 


“Impoverished, Grasping, and Extravagant” 


Just as government today offers: poor value for the money it collects, so did 
the Church at the end of the fifteenth century. As ecclesiastical historian 


— 


— 


$n Te ER A ARR me ce ne 


The Last Days of Politics 113 


Euan Cameron put it, “[A]n impoverished local priesthood seemed to offer a 
poor service for the money it demanded; much of what was levied effectively 
‘disappeared’ into enclosed monasteries or the arcane areas of higher educa- 
tion or administration. In spite of gifts prodigally given to some sectors of 
the Church, the institution as a whole managed to appear simultaneously 
impoverished, grasping, and extravagant.” It would be hard to deny the 
parallel with late-twentieth-century government. 

Religious observances in the late fifteenth century grew like programs 
proliferating in welfare states today. Not only did special benedictions multi- 
ply endlessly, along with the supply of saints and saints’ bones, but every 
year there were more churches, more convents, more monasteries, more 
friaries, more confessors (resident household priests), more preacherships, 
more cathedral chapters, more endowed chantries, more relic cults, more 
religious co-fraternities, more religious festivals, and new holy days. Ser- 
vices grew longer. Prayers and hymns grew more complicated. One after 
another, new mendicant orders appeared to beg for alms. The result was 
institutional overload similar to that characterizing heavily politicized socie- 
ties today. 

Religious festivals and feast days proliferated on all sides. Religious ser- 
vices grew more numerous, with special festivals in honor of the seven 
sorrows of Mary, of her sisters, and of all the saints of Jesus’ genealogy. 
For the faithful to meet their religious obligations became increasingly costly 
and burdensome, much as the costs of remaining within the law have prolif- 
erated today. 


Innocents Pay 


Then as now, the productive bore a growing burden of income redistribution. 
These costs were rising more sharply than anyone in authority recognized 
because of a shift in the use of capital. The relative advantage of holding 
land as compared to money capital was falling. Yet the medieval mind 
continued to think in terms of a status-bound society, where social position 
was determined by who you were, rather than by your skill in deploying 
capital effectively. Little or no consideration was given to the rising opportu- 
nity costs of staging exaggerated religious observances. These costs fell 
most heavily upon the more ambitious and hardworking peasants, burghers, 
and yeoman farmers, who depended more than the aristocracy upon deploy- 
ing their capital usefully. They were obliged to shoulder a disproportionate 
cost of outfitting the tables at the endless feasts and holy days (holidays), as 
well as paying to support an extravagant Church bureaucracy. 


114 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Counterproductive Regulation 


At the end of the fifteenth century, the Church largely controlled the regula- 
tory powers that have since been assumed by governments. The Church 
dominated important areas of law, recording deeds, registering marriages, 
probating wills, licensing trades, titling land, and stipulating terms and con- 
ditions of commerce. The details of life were almost as thoroughly regulated 
by canon law as they are today by bureaucracy, and to much the same end. 
Just as political regulation today has become riddled with confusions and 
contradictions, so canon law was five hundred years ago. These regulations 
often suppressed and complicated commerce in ways that revealed that facil- 
itating productivity was far from the minds of the regulators. 

For example, it was forbidden to do business for an entire year on what- 
ever day of the week the most recent twenty-eighth of December happened 
to fall. Thus if it was a Tuesday, no legal business could be conducted on 
Tuesdays as an obligatory expression of piety in honor of the Slaughter of 
the Innocents. On years when December 28 fell on any day other than 
Sunday, this injunction hampered the potential for many types of commerce, 
increasing costs by delaying transactions or forestalling them altogether. 


Monopoly Pricing 


Canon law was also imposed to reinforce monopoly prices. The Church 
earned significant revenues from the sale of alum mined from its properties 
in Tolfa, Italy. When some of its customers in the textile industry showed a 
preference for cheaper alum imported from Turkey, the Vatican attempted to 
sustain its monopoly pricing through canon law, declaring it sinful to use the 
less costly alum. Merchants who persisted in purchasing the cheaper Turkish 
product were excommunicated. The famous ban on eating meat on Friday 
originated in the same spirit. The Church was not only the largest feudal 
landholder; it also held major fisheries. Church Fathers discovered a theolog- 
ical necessity for the pious to eat fish, which not incidentally ensured a 
demand for their product at a time when transport and sanitary conditions 
discouraged fish consumption. 

Like the nation-state today, the late-medieval Church not only regulated 
specific industries to directly underpin its own interests; it also made the 
most of its regulatory powers to gain revenue for itself in other ways. Clerics 
went to special pains to promulgate regulations and edicts that were difficult 
to abide by. For example, incest was very broadly defined, so that even 
remote cousins and persons related only by marriage required special dispen- 
sation from the Church to marry. As this included almost everyone in many 
small European villages before the era of modern travel, selling waivers for 


‘ 


The Last Days of Politics 115 


incestuous marriages became a thriving source of Church revenue. Even sex 
within marriage itself was tightly circumscribed by ecceliastic regulation. 
Sexual relations between spouses were illegal on Sundays, Wednesdays, and 
Fridays, as well as for forty days prior to Easter and Christmas. Further, 
couples were to abstain from sex for three days prior to receiving commu- 
nion. In other words, married couples were forbidden to enjoy sex without 
an indulgence for a minimum of 55 percent of the days of the year. In 
The Bishop’s Brothels, historian E. J. Burford suggests that these “idiotic” 
regulations of marriage helped stimulate the growth of medieval prostitution, 
from which the Church profited mightily.*> Burford reports that the Bishop 
of Winchester was for many centuries the principal of London’s Bankside 
brothels in Southwark. Further, ecclesiastical profiteering from prostitution 
was by no means merely a local English affair: 


Pope Sixtus IV (c. 1471) who allegedly caught syphilis from one of his many 
mistresses—became the first pope to issue licences to prostitutes and to levy 
a tax on their earnings, augmenting vastly the papal revenues in the process. 
Indeed the Roman Curia partly financed the building of St. Peter’s by this tax 
and the sale of licences. His successor, Pope Leo X, is said to have made some 
twenty-two thousand gold ducats through the sale of licences, four times as 
much as he made by selling indulgences in Germany.** 


Even the famous rule of celibacy imposed on priests was a lucrative 
source of revenue for the medieval Church. As Burford reports, the Church 
imposed “a racket known as cullagium,” a fee imposed upon “concubinary 
priests.” 3? This proved so lucrative that it was imposed uniformly upon all 
priests by bishops in France and Germany, in spite of the fact that the 
Lateran Council in 1215 had denounced “this disgraceful traffic by which 
such prelates regularly sell permission to sin.” ** It was merely one of many 
lucrative markets for the sale of licenses to infringe canon law and regula- 
tion, a trade motivated by the same logic that impels grasping politicians to 
seek arbitrary regulatory powers over commerce. 


Indulgences 


The power to regulate arbitrarily is also the power to sell an exemption from 
the harm such regulations can do. The Church sold permits, or “indul- 
gences,” authorizing everything from relief from petty burdens on commerce 
to permission to eat dairy products in Lent. These “indulgences” were not 
only sold at high prices to the aristocracy and the rich burghers. They were 
also packaged as lottery prizes much like the government-run lotteries of 
today to attract the pennies of the poor.*® The trade in indulgences increased 


116 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


as the Church’s expenditures outran its income. This led many to infer the 
obvious, that the institutional Church was using its powers primarily to raise 
revenues. As a contemporary critic put it, “[C]anon law was instituted solely 
for the purpose of making a great deal of money; whoever would be a 
Christian has to buy his way out of its provisions.” *° 


Bureaucratic Overload 


The costs of supporting institutionalized religion at the end of the fifteenth 
century had reached a historic extreme, much as the costs of supporting 
government have reached a senile extreme today. The more life was saturated 
with religion, the more expensive and bureaucratic the Church became. In 
Cameron’s words, “It was far easier to find people to fill the vastly increased 
number of Church posts at the end of the Middle Ages, than to find money 
to pay for them.” +! Just as bankrupt governments today scrounge for reve- 
nues in counterproductive ways, so did the Church five hundred years ago. 
Indeed, the churchmen used some of the same predatory tricks mastered by 
the politicians today. 

The medieval Church five hundred years ago, like the nation-state today, 
consumed more of society’s resources than it ever had before, or ever would 
again. The Church then, like the state today, seemed incapable of functioning 
and sustaining itself on even record amounts of revenue. Just as the state has 
come to dominate late-industrial economies, spending more than half of all 
revenue in some Western European countries, so the Church dominated the 
late-feudal economy, draining resources and retarding growth. 


a 
ry 


Deficit Spending in the Fifteenth Century 


The Church resorted to every conceivable expedient to squeeze more money 
out of its charges to feed its overgrown bureaucracy. Regions directly under 
the lordship of the Church were required to pay higher and higher taxes. In 
provinces and kingdoms where the Church lacked direct taxing power, the 
Vatican imposed “annates,” a payment to be made by the local sovereign in 
lieu of direct ecclesiastic taxes. 

The Church, like the state today, also raided its own coffers, diverting 
funds from benefactions earmarked for specific uses to pay for general 
overhead expenses. Benefices and venal religious offices were openly sold, 
as were the income streams from tithes. In effect, the interests in tithes 
became the ecclesiastic equivalent of bonds issued by modern governments 
to finance their chronic deficits. 

While the Church was the ideological defender of feudalism and critic of 
commerce and capitalism, like the nation-state today, it utilized every avail- 


| 
| 
| 
{ 


The Last Days of Politics 117 


able marketing technique to optimize its own revenues. The Church operated 
a thriving business in the sale of sacramentals, including consecrated can- 
dies, palms blessed on Palm Sunday, “herbs blessed on the Feast of the 
Assumption, and especially the varieties of Holy Water.” * 

Like today’s politicians who threaten constituents with curtailed garbage 
pickup and other indignities if they decline to pay higher taxes, religious 
authorities in the fifteenth century were also prone to cutting off religious 
services to blackmail congregations into paying arbitrary fines. Often the 
fines were imposed for some petty offense done by a few persons who need 
not even have been members of the congregation in question. For example, 
in 1436, Bishop Jacques Du Chatelier, “‘a very ostentatious, grasping man,” 
closed the Church of the Innocents in Paris for twenty-two days, halting all 
religious services while waiting for an impossibly large fine to be paid by 
two beggars. The men had quarreled in the church and shed a few drops of 
blood, which the bishop claimed had deconsecrated the church. He would 
not allow anyone to use the church for weddings, burials, or the normal 
sacraments of the calendar until his fine was paid.*° 


The Italian Stewes (to make the Pope good cheer) 
payd twentie thousand Duckets in a yeere. 
Besides they give a Priest (tamend his fee) 

the profit of a whore, or two or three... . 
Methinkes it must be a bad Divintie 

that with the Stewes hath such affinitie. 


—FIFTEENTH-CENTURY ENGLISH BALLAD 


Hatred of Church Leaders 


Little wonder that the common opinion of the late fifteenth century despised 
the higher and lower clergy, much as common opinion in highly politicized 
societies today despises the bureaucracy and politicians. As Johan Huizinga 
put it, “Hatred is the right word to use in this context, for hatred it was, 
latent, but general and persistent. The people never wearied of hearing the 
vices of the clergy arraigned.” *° Part of the reason that people were com- 
monly convinced that the Church was “grasping and extravagant” is that it 
was true. “The worldliness of the higher ranks of the clergy and the deterio- 
ration of the lower grades” ** were too obvious to miss. From the parish 
priest to the pope himself, the clergy appeared to be corrupt as only the 
personnel of a predominant institution can be. 

Five hundred years ago, the pope, Alexander VI, made even Giulio An- 
dreotti and Bill Clinton seem like exemplars of integrity. Alexander VI was 


118 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


known for his wild parties. As a cardinal in Siena, he staged a famous orgy 
to which only “Siena’s most beautiful young women had been invited, but 
their ‘husbands, fathers, and brothers’ had been excluded.” *’ The Siena orgy 
was famous, but it later proved to be tame compared to those Alexander 
threw after becoming pope. Perhaps the most lurid of those was the so-called 
Ballet of the Chestnuts, which involved Rome’s “fifty most beautiful 
whores” in a copulation contest with the Church Fathers and other important 
Romans. As William Manchester describes it, “Servants kept score of each 
man’s orgasms, for the pope greatly admired virility. ... After everyone was 
exhausted, His Holiness distributed prizes—cloaks, boots, caps, and fine 
silken tunics. The winners, the diarist wrote, were those who made love with 
those courtesans the greatest number of times.” # 

Alexander fathered at least seven and perhaps eight illegitimate children. 
One of his apparent sons, Giovanni, was the so-called Infans Romanus, 
born to Alexander’s illegitimate daughter, Lucrezia Borgia, when she was 
eighteen. In a secret papal bull, Alexander admitted fathering Giovanni. If 
he was not the father, he was certainly the grandfather on both sides. The 
pope was involved in a three-way incestuous affair with Lucrezia, who was 
also the mistress of Juan, duke of Gandia, Alexander’s oldest illegitimate 
son, as well as the mistress of another illegitimate son, Cardinal Cesare 
Borgia. Cesare was the prince of the Church who served as Niccolo Machia- 
velli’s inspiration for The Prince. Cesare was a killer, as was the pope, who 
was known to have plotted several murders. One or the other of them appar- 
ently became jealous of Juan, whose lifeless body was fished out of the 
Tiber River on June 15, 1497.*9 

The leadership of the late-medieval Church was as corrupt as the leader- 
ship of the nation-state today. 


“Today I have twice become a father. God’s blessing on it.” ° 


—RODOLPH AGRICOLA, on hearing that his concubine 
had given birth to a son on the day he was elected abbot 


HYPOCRISY 


Beneath a “superficial crust of piety,” late-medieval society was remarkably 
blasphemous, irreverent, and debauched. Churches were the favorite trysting 
places of young men and women, and frequent gathering spots of prosti- 
tutes and vendors of obscene pictures. Historians report that “the irreverence 
of daily religious practice was almost unbounded.” *! Choristers hired to 


The Last Days of Politics 119 


chant for the souls of the dead commonly substituted profane words in the 
mass. Vigils and processions, which played a far bigger role in medieval 
religious practice than they do today, were nonetheless “disgraced by rib- 
aldry, mockery and drinking.” So said late-medieval Europe’s leading theo- 
logical authority, Denis the Carthusian.* 

While such a report could be challenged as the griping of a stiff-lipped 
moralist, it is merely one of many accounts that paint the same picture. 
There is ample reason to believe that the bawdy and the sacred were fre- 
quently close companions in medieval life. Pilgrimages, for example, so 
often degenerated into riot and debauchery that high-minded reformers ar- 
gued without success that they be suppressed. Local religious processions 
also provided regular occasions for mobs to vandalize; loot, and generally 
indulge in whatever drunken antics caught their fancy. Even when people sat 
still to hear mass, it was frequently not a sober experience. Prodigious 
quantities of wine were consumed in church, especially on festival nights. 
Accounts from the Council of Strasbourg show that those who “watched in 
prayer” on St. Adolphus Night drank 1,100 liters of wine provided by the 
council in honor of the saint. 

Jean Gerson, a leading fifteenth-century theologian, reports that “the most 
sacred festivals, even Christmas night,” were spent “in debauchery, playing 
at cards, swearing and blaspheming.” When admonished for these lapses, 
the common people “plead the example of the nobility and the clergy, who 
behave in like manner with impunity.” *? 


Piety and Compassion 


The piety that rationalized the saturation of society by organized religion in 
the late Middle Ages served the same purpose as the “compassion” that is 
meant to justify the political domination of life today. The sale of indul- 
gences to satisfy a desire for piety without morals parallels lavish welfare 
spending to slake the pretense of compassion without charity. It was largely 
immaterial whether the actual effect of received practices was to improve 
moral character or save souls, just as it is largely immaterial whether a 
welfare program actually improves the lives of the people to whom it is 
directed. “Piety,” like “compassion,” was an almost superstitious invoca- 
tion. 

In a time when causal relationships were scarcely understood, rituals and 
Sacraments of the Church permeated every phase of life. “... A journey, a 
task, a visit, were equally attended by a thousand formalities: benedictions, 
ceremonies, formulas.” ** Prayers inscribed on pieces of parchment were 
strung like necklaces on those suffering from fevers. Malnourished girls 
draped locks of their hair in front of the image of St. Urban to prevent 


120 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


further hair loss. Peasants in Navarre marched in processions behind an 
image of St. Peter to solicit rain during droughts.** People eagerly adopted 
these and other “ineffective techniques to allay anxiety when effective ones 
were not available.” *° 


Two Wrongs to Make a Rite 


People were so firmly convinced of the miraculous qualities attaching to the 
relics of saints that the death of any notably pious person frequently occa- 
sioned a mad rush to divide up the body. After Thomas Aquinas died in the 
monastery of Fossanuova, the monks there decapitated and boiled his body 
in order to secure control of his bones. When St. Elizabeth of Hungary was 
lying in state, “a crowd of worshippers came and cut or tore strips of the 
linen enveloping her face; they cut off the hair, the nails, even the nipples.” >” 


Piety Without Virtue 


The medieval mind saw the saints and their relics as part of the arsenal of 
faith in a world that was colder in winter, darker at night, and more desperate 
in the face of disease than any reader of this book will have been likely to 
know. More emphatically than in the modern period, people in the Middle 
Ages believed that demons were real, that God actively intervened in the 
world, and that prayer, penance, and pilgrimages earned divine favor. 

To say simply that people believed in God could convey neither the 
intensity of their adherence nor the apparent ease with which medieval piety 
seemed to bed down with sin. Belief in the efficacy of rites, rituals, and 
sacraments was so pervasive that it perhaps inevitably undercut the urgency 
of behaving in a virtuous way. For any sin or spiritual defect there was a 
remedy, a penance that would clear the slate, in what came to be a “mathe- 
matics of salvation.” ** Religion became so all-pervasive that its sincerity 
necessarily began to flag. As Huizinga put it, “Religion penetrating all re- 
lations in life means a constant blending of the spheres of holy and of pro- 
fane thought. Holy things will become too common to be deeply felt.” °° And 
SO It was. 


DOWNSIZING THE CHURCH 


By the end of the fifteenth century, the Church was not only as corrupt as 
the nation-state today; it was also a major drag on economic growth. The 
Church engrossed large amounts of capital in unproductive ways, imposing 
burdens that limited the output of society and suppressed commerce. These 


The Last Days of Politics 121 


burdens, like those imposed by the nation-state today, were numerous. We 
know what happened to organized religion in the wake of the Gunpowder 
Revolution: it created strong incentives to downsize religious institutions 
and lower their costs. When the traditional Church declined to do this, 
Protestant sects seized the opportunity to compete. In so doing they em- 
ployed almost every device imaginable to reduce the cost of living a pious 
ine: 


They built spare new churches and sometimes stripped the altars of older 
ones to free capital for other uses. 
¢ They revised Christian doctrine in ways that lowered costs, emphasizing 
faith over good deeds as a key to salvation. 
¢ They developed a new, terse liturgy, pared or eliminated feast days, and 
abolished numerous sacraments. 
__ ¢ They closed monasteries and nunneries, and stopped giving alms to men- 
dicant orders. Poverty went from being an apostolic virtue to an unwel- 
come and often blameworthy social problem.°° 


To understand how downsizing the Church liberated productivity, you 
have to review the many ways that the Church stood in the way of growth 
before its monopoly was broken. Much as the nation-state does today, the 
Church at the end of the fifteenth century imposed an incredible burden of 
excess costs. 

1. Direct costs such as tithes, taxes, and fees fed the overgrown ecclesias- 
tical bureaucracy. Tithes were common to Protestant churches that replaced 
the medieval “Holy Mother Church” also, but they tended not to be collect- 
ible in urban areas. In effect, the end of the Church’s monopoly led to 
declining marginal tax rates in regions with the most highly developed 
commerce. 

2. Religious doctrines made saving difficult. The arch-villain of the medi- 
eval Church was the “miser,” the person who saved his gold at the risk of 
his soul. The requirement for the faithful to fund “good deeds” entailed 
costly contributions to the Church. The doctrine of “satisfactions” obliged 
those concerned about salvation to endow masses or “chantries” in order to 
avoid purgatory. Luther attacked this directly in the eighth and thirteenth of 
his ninety-five theses. He wrote that “the dying will pay all their debts by 
their death.” *' In other words, the capital of the Protestant believer was 
available to pass on to his heirs. Under Protestant doctrine, there was no 
need to endow chantries to repeat masses, usually for thirty years, and 
sometimes, for the very wealthy, in perpetuity. 

3. The ideology of the medieval Church also encouraged diversion of 

1 capital into acquisition of relics. Numerous relic cults were endowed with 


122 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


large sums to acquire physical objects associated with Christ or various 
saints. The very wealthy even assembled personal collections of relics. For 
example, the Elector Frederick of Saxony amassed a collection of nineteen 
thousand relics, some acquired on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1493. His 
collection included what he believed to be “the body of a holy innocent, 
Mary’s milk, and straw from the stable of the Nativity.” °? Presumably, the 
return on capital invested in these relics was low. The shift to an emphasis 
on faith and the notion of the elect downgraded the importance of acquisi- 
tion of the trappings of Christian life for use as charms and encouraged 
money to find more productive channels that paid a return that the monarch 
could tap. 

4. The advent of Protestant denominations broke the medieval Church’s 
economic monopolies, and led to a significant weakening of regulation. As 
we have seen, canon law was frequently bent to support Church monopolies 
and commercial interests. Because the new denominations had fewer eco- 
nomic interests to protect and promote, their version of religious doctrine 
tended to result in a freer system, with fewer inhibitions of commerce. 

5. The Protestant revolution abolished many of the nites and rituals of the 
medieval Church that burdened the time of the faithful. Rites, sacraments, 
and holy days had been elaborated to absorb almost the entire calendar by 
the late fifteenth century. This ceremonial overload was a logical outgrowth 
of the Church’s insistence “that one could multiply acts of prayer or worship 
as often as one liked and gain benefits from them.” Multiply they did. 
Productivity was taxed by longer and more elaborate services, obligations to 
recite repetitious prayers in penance, and the proliferation of feast days of 
saints during which no work could be done. Numerous regulations and 
ceremonies punctuated the day and the seasons, considerably shrinking the 
time available for productive tasks. This may have done little to interrupt the 
rhythms of medieval farming, in which 90 percent or more of the population 
was engaged. There were many periods during the seasons when field labor 
was not required on a daily basis. The yield of crops under medieval condi- 
tions probably varied more with the weather and uncontrollable rhythms of 
infestation than from any marginal addition of labor beyond the minimum 
that the Church calendar accommodated. 

The larger problem of lost productivity did not fall so much in farming as 
in other areas. The Church’s demands on time were far less compatible with 
craft work, manufacturing, transport, commerce, or any other undertaking 
where productivity and profitability were likely to be crucially determined 
by the amount of time devoted to the task. 

It may not be a coincidence that the great transition at the end of the 
fifteenth century occurred at a time when land rents were rising and real 
wages for the peasantry were in decline. Increased population pressures had 


, 


The Last Days of Politics 123 


reduced the yield from the common lands, often found surrounding rivers 
and streams, upon which peasants depended to graze their livestock, and in 
some cases, for fish and firewood. The whittling down of living standards 
placed increasingly urgent pressures on peasants to find alternative sources 
of income. As a result, “more and more of the rural population turned to 
small-scale manufacturing for the market, above all in textiles, in the process 
known as ‘putting-out’ or ‘proto-industrialization.’ ” The ceremonial bur- 
dens on time imposed by the Church stood in the way of efforts by the more 
ambitious peasants to supplement their farming income by craft work, as 
indeed they inhibited any redeployment of effort in new economic directions. 

One of the more pronounced contributions that Protestant sects made to 
productivity was the scrapping of forty feast days. This not only saved the 
considerable costs of staging the festivals, including outfitting the village 
tables with food and drink; it also freed a great deal of valuable time. 
Implicitly, everyone who stopped honoring the forty banished feast days 
could add three hundred man-hours or more to his annual productivity. In 
short, the scrapping of ceremonial overload in the medieval Church opened 
the way for an appreciable increase in output simply by freeing time that 
would otherwise have been lost to commerce. 

6. The break in the Church’s monopoly disgorged vast amounts of assets 
that were yielding low returns under Church management—a situation with 
obvious parallels to state holdings late in the twentieth century. The Church 
was the largest feudal landholder by far. Its grip on the land matched that of 
the state in highly politicized societies today—exceeding 50 percent of the 
total in some European countries such as Bohemia. According to canon law, 
once a property came under the control of the Church, it could not be 
alienated. Thus the holdings of Church land tended steadily to rise, as the 
Church received more and more testamentary gifts from the faithful for 
financing various social welfare services, chantries, and other activities. 

While it is difficult to measure precisely the relative productivity of 
Church holdings, it must have been far lower at the end of the Middle Ages 
than it was in the early part of that epoch. By the fourteenth century, in- 
creased emphasis upon production for the market rather than subsistence 
farming had led most lay lords to turn from illiterate headmen to profes- 
sional managers to optimize the output of their holdings. Their incentives 
probably led them to quickly outstrip the output of Church properties, which 
in theory usually did not accrue to anyone’s private profit. No doubt some of 
the more worldly prince-bishops husbanded their estates in ways indistin- 
guishable from those of the lay lords. Yet the productivity of other Church 
properties would surely have suffered from failures of indifferent manage- 
ment by a huge, far-flung institution, whose drawbacks would have been 

_ similar to the drawbacks of state and communal ownership today. It is 


124 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


obvious, as well, that the seizure of the monasteries rearrayed resources that 
were no longer needed for the reproduction of books and manuscripts after 
the advent of the printing press. 

7. As we detailed in The Great Reckoning, some of the Protestant sects 
immediately responded to the Gunpowder Revolution by altering their doc- 
trines in ways that encouraged commerce, such as by lifting the injunction 
against usury, or lending at interest. The ideological opposition of the medi- 
eval Church to capitalism was a drag on growth. The main ideological thrust 
of Church teachings was to reinforce feudalism, in which the Church had a 
large stake, as the largest feudal landholder. Consciously, or not, the Church 
tended to make religious virtues of its own economic interests, while mili- 
tating against the development of manufacturing and independent commer- 
cial wealth that were destined to destabilize the feudal system. Injunctions 
against “avarice,” for example, applied mainly to commercial transactions 
rather than feudal levies, and never to the sale of indulgences. The infamous 
attempts by the Church to fix a “just price” for items in commerce tended 
to suppress economic returns on those products and services where the 
Church itself was not a producer. 

The ban on “usury” was a signal example of the Church’s resistance to 
commercial innovation. Banking and credit were crucial to the development 
of larger-scale commercial enterprises. By restricting the availability of 
credit, the Church retarded growth. 

8. More subtly, the new denominations’ focus upon the Bible as a text 
helped demolish the medieval Church’s mode of thought as well as its 
ideology. Both placed obstacles in the way of growth. The cultural program- 
ming of the late Middle Ages encouraged people to see the world in terms 
of symbolic similitude rather than cause and effect. This short-circuited 
reasoning. It also pointed away from a mercantile conception of life. Think- 
ing in terms of symbolic equivalences does not easily translate into thinking 
in terms of market values. “The three estates represent the qualities of the 
Virgin. The seven electors of the Empire signify the virtues; the five towns 


of Artois and Hainault, which in 1477 remained faithful to the house of | 


Burgundy, are the five wise virgins. ...In the same way shoes mean care 
and diligence, stockings perseverance, the garter resolution, etc.” © As this 
example quoted from the distinguished medieval historian Johan Huizinga 
suggests, thinking was dominated by dogma, rigid symbols, and allegory 
that tied together every aspect of life in terms of hierarchic subordination. 
Every occupation, every part, every color, every number, even every element 
of grammar was tied into a grand system of religious conceptions. 

Thus the mundane bits and pieces of life were interpreted not in terms 
of their causal connections, but in terms of static symbols and allegories. 
Sometimes personifying virtues and vices, each thing stood for something, 


The Last Days of Politics 125 


which stood for something else again, in ways that often blocked rather than 
clarified cause and effect. To confuse matters further, relationships were 
often arbitrarily bound together in systems of numbers. Sevens played a 
particularly important role. There were the seven virtues, the seven deadly 
sins, the seven supplications of the Lord’s Prayer, the seven Gifts of the Holy 
Spirit, the seven moments of the passion, the seven beatitudes, and the seven 
sacraments, “represented by the seven animals and followed by the seven 
diseases.” °° 


Fifteenth-Century Journalism 


A fifteenth-century news story, if it had been written, would not have an- 
swered any of the classic questions of reporting facts, except indirectly 
through allegoric personification. Consider this report, in a private diary, of 
the Burgundian murders in fifteenth-century Paris: 


Then arose the goddess of Discord, who lived in the tower of Evil Counsel, 
and awoke Wrath, the mad woman, and Covetousness and Rage and Ven- 
geance, and they took up arms of all sorts and cast out Reason, Justice, 
Remembrance of God, and Moderation most shamefully. Then Madness them 
enraged, and Murder and Slaughter killed, cut down, put to death, massacred 
all they found in the prisons. .. . and Covetousness tucked up her skirts into 
her belt with Rapine, her daughter, and Larceny, her son. ... Afterward, the 
aforesaid people went by guidance of their goddesses, that is to say, Wrath, 
Covetousness, and Vengeance, who led them through all the public prisons of 
Paris, etc.®’ 


The shift away from the medieval paradigm helped prepare people to think 
in “modern” terms about cause and effect, rather than in terms of symbolic 
linkages and allegoric personification. 

It is not necessary to argue that the doctrine and mode of thinking of the 
late-medieval Church were insincere to see that they tended to fit closely 
with the needs of agrarian feudalism, while allowing very little place for 
commerce, much less industrial development. It was rather a case of the 
Church as a predominant institution shaping moral, cultural, and legal con- 
Straints in ways that were closely fitted to the imperatives of feudalism. For 
this very reason, they were ill-suited to the needs of industrial society, just 
as the moral, cultural, and legal constraints of the modern nation-state are 
ill-suited to facilitating commerce in the Information Age. We believe that 
the state will be revolutionized, just as the Church was, to facilitate the 
realization of the new potential. 

The Protestant doctrine that heaven could be attained by faith alone and 


126 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


without the benefit of endowed prayers for the dead was cast as a theological 
issue. Yet it was theology to fit the economic realities of a new age. It met 
the obvious need for a more cost-effective path to salvation at a time when 
the opportunity costs of sinking additional capital into the bloated ecclesias- 
tical bureaucracy had suddenly risen. People had minded less giving their 
money to the Church when there was no other outlet for it. But when they 
suddenly saw the chance to make one hundred times their capital financing 
a spice voyage to the East, or get a lesser, but still promising sum of 40 
percent per annum financing a battalion for the king, they understandably 
sought the grace of God where their own interests lay. 

Many merchants and other commoners soon became far richer than their 
forebears had been under feudalism. The sharp acceleration of living stan- 
dards among the merchants and small manufacturers of the early-modern 
period was widely unpopular among those whose incomes and way of life 
were collapsing with feudalism. The weakening of the Church’s monopoly 
and the increased megapolitical power of the rich led to a sharp reduction in 
income redistribution. The peasants and urban poor who were not immediate 
beneficiaries of the new system were bitterly envious of those who were. 
Huizinga described the prevailing attitude, in what could well be an im- 
portant parallel with the Information Revolution: “Hatred of rich people, 
especially of the new rich, who were then very numerous, is general.” © 

An equally striking parallel arose from a tremendous surge in crime. The 
breakdown of the old order almost always unleashes a surge in crime, if not 
the outright anarchy of the feudal revolution we explored in the last chapter. 
At the end of the Middle Ages, crime also skyrocketed as the old systems of 
social control broke down. In Huizinga’s words, “[C]rime came to be re- 
garded as a menace to order and society.” © It could be equally menacing in 
the future. 

The modern world was born in the confusion of new technologies, new 
ideas, and the stench of black powder. Gunpowder weapons and improved 
shipping destabilized the military foundation of feudalism, even as new 
communications technology undermined its ideology. Among the elements 
that the new technology of printing helped reveal was the corruption of the 
Church, whose hierarchy as well as rank and file were already held in 
low regard by a society that paradoxically placed religion at the center of 
everything. It is a paradox with an obvious contemporary parallel in the 
disillusionment with politicians and bureaucrats, in a society that places 
politics at the center of everything. 

The end of the fifteenth century was a time of disillusion, confusion, 
pessimism, and despair. A time much like now. 


CHAPTER 3 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 
UF THE 
NATION-oTATE 


Democracy and Nationalism as 
Resource strategies in the 
Age of Violence 


“Most important of all, success in war depends on having enough 
money to provide whatever the enterprise needs.”! 


—ROBERT DE BALSAC, 1502 


THE RUBBLE OF HISTORY 


On November 9 and 10, 1989, television broadcast to the world scenes of 
exuberant East Berliners dismantling the Berlin Wall with sledgehammers. 
Fledgling entrepreneurs among the crowd picked up pieces of the wall that 
were later marketed to capitalists far and wide as souvenir paperweights. A 
brisk business in these relics was done for years thereafter. Even as we write, 
one can still encounter occasional ads in small magazines offering bits of 


_ old East German concrete for sale at prices ordinarily commanded by high- 


ee 


grade silver ore. We believe that those who bought the Berlin Wall paper- 


128 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


weights should be in no rush to sell. They hold mementos of something 
bigger than the collapse of Communism. We believe that the Berlin Wall 
became the most important pile of historical rubble since the walls of San 
Giovanni were blasted to smithereens almost five centuries earlier in Febru- 
ary 1495.2 

The leveling of San Giovanni by the French king Charles VIII was the 
first blast of the Gunpowder Revolution. It marked the end of the feudal 
phase of history and the advent of industrialism, as we outlined earlier. The 
destruction of the Berlin Wall marks another historical watershed, the pas- 
sage between the Industrial Age and the new Information Age. Never has 
there been so great a symbolic triumph of efficiency over power. When the 
walls of San Giovanni fell, it was a stark demonstration that the economic 
returns to violence in the world had risen sharply. The fall of the Berlin Wall 
says something different, namely that returns to violence are now falling. 
This is something that few have even begun to recognize, but it will have 
dramatic consequences. 

For reasons we explore in this chapter, the Berlin Wall may prove to be 
far more symbolic of the whole era of the industrial nation-state than those 
in the crowd that night in Berlin or the millions watching from a distance 
understood. The Berlin Wall was built to a very different purpose than the 
walls of San Giovanni—to prevent people on the inside from escaping rather 
than to prevent predators on the outside from entering. That fact alone is a 
telling indicator of the rise in the power of the state from the fifteenth to the 
twentieth centuries. And in more ways than one. 

For centuries, the nation-state made all outward-facing walls redundant 
and unnecessary. The level of monopoly that the state exercised over coer- 
cion in those areas where it first took hold made them both more peaceful 
internally and more formidable militarily than any sovereignties the world 
had seen before. The state used the resources extracted from a largely dis- 
armed population to crush small-scale predators. The nation-state became 
history’s most successful instrument for seizing resources. Its success was 
based upon its superior ability to extract the wealth of its citizens. 


“MTV is more than a purveyor of music videos—and a promotional tool of 
the recording industry. It’s the first truly global network, the first network to 
deliver a single stream of programming in virtually every country in the world. 
In the process, MTV is creating a single sense of shared global reality for its 
viewers, children and young adults. Recent research has found that young 
people around the planet more and more share not just common pop icons and 
common tastes, but common expectations for their careers, common sets of 
values about what is meaningful in life and what there is to be afraid of, a 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 129 
common sense that politics is less important than their own abilities in shaping 
their futures.” 


—JIM TAYLOR AND WATTS WACKER, The 500-Year Delta: 
What Happens After What Comes Next 


“Love It or Leave It” (Unless You Are Rich) 


Before the transition from the nation-state to the new sovereignties of the 
Information Age is complete, many residents of the largest and most power- 
ful Western nation-states, like their counterparts in East Berlin in 1989, will 
be plotting to find their way out. For the generations that came of age before 
World War II, or early in the Cold War, moving across borders is traumatic. 
But for new generations, who draw their bearings from a more global per- 
spective, abandoning the country of their birth is not the unthinkable deci- 
sion it would be for older persons who are more deeply inculcated with the 
ideology of the nation-state. Jim Taylor and Watts Wacker report the intri- 
guing results of a mass survey of 25,000 middle-class high school students 
on five continents. In a sampling conducted during the 1995—96 school year 
by Brainwaves Group, a New York consumer-research firm, nine of ten 
students agreed that “it’s up to me to get what I want of life.” More strik- 
ingly, “almost half the teens said they expected to leave the country of their 
birth in pursuit of their goals.”* Perhaps because he is tuned in to the 
attitudes of the MTV generation, as the first presidential candidate to cam- 
paign on MTV, Bill Clinton has sought to make it more difficult for Ameri- 
cans to “leave the country of their birth in pursuit of their goals.” In 1995, 
at about the same time that the high school students were declaring their 
intentions to seek independence, the President of the United States proposed 
the enactment of an exit tax, a “Berlin Wall for Capital,” that would require 
wealthy Americans to pay a substantial ransom to escape with even part of 
their money. 

Clinton’s ransom is not only reminiscent of the late East German state’s 
policy of treating its citizens as assets; it also calls to mind the increasingly 
draconian measures taken to shore up the fiscal position of the Roman 
Empire in decline. This passage from The Cambridge Ancient History tells 
the story. 


Thus began the fierce endeavor of the State to squeeze the population to the 
last drop. Since economic resources fell short of what was needed, the strong 
fought to secure the chief share for themselves with a violence and unscrupu- 
lousness well in keeping with the origin of those in power and with a soldiery 
accustomed to plunder. The full rigour of the law was let loose on the popula- 


130 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


tion. Soldiers acted as bailiffs or wandered as secret police through the land. 
Those who suffered most were, of course, the propertied class. It was relatively 
easy to lay hands on their property, and in an emergency, they were the class 
from whom something could be extorted most frequently and quickly.° 


When failing systems have the power to do so, they often impose penal 
burdens upon those seeking to escape. Again, we quote The Cambridge 
Ancient History: “If the propertied class buried their money, or sacrificed 
two-thirds of their estate to escape from a magistracy, or went so far as 
to give up their whole property in order to get free of the domains rent, 
and the non-propertied class ran away, the State replied by increasing the 
pressure.” 

This is worth remembering as you plan ahead. The twilight of state sys- 
tems in the past has seldom been a polite, orderly process. We mentioned 
the nasty habits of Roman tax collectors in Chapter 2. The large numbers of 
agri deserti, or abandoned farms, in Western Europe after the collapse of 
the Roman Empire reflected only a small part of a wider problem. In fact, 
exactions tended to be relatively mild in Gaul, and in the frontier areas that 
comprise current-day Luxembourg and Germany. In Rome’s most fertile 
region, Egypt, where farming was more productive because of irrigation, 
desertion by owners was an even bigger problem. The question of whether 
to attempt escape, the u/timum refugium, as it was known in Latin, became 
the overriding quandary of almost everyone with property. Records show 
that “among the common questions which used to be put to an oracle in 
Egypt three standard types were: ‘Am I to become a beggar?’ ‘Shall I take 
to flight?’ and ‘Is my flight to be stopped?’ ”° _ 

Clinton’s proposal says yes. It is an early version of an obstacle to escape 
that is likely to grow more onerous as the fiscal resources of the nation-state 
slip away. Of course, the first U.S. version of an exit barrier is more benign 
than Erich Honecker’s concrete and barbed wire. It also involves greater 
price sensitivity, with the burden falling only on “billionaires” with taxable 
estates above $600,000. Nonetheless, it was justified with similar arguments 
to those once propounded by Honecker in defense of the late German Demo- 
cratic Republic’s most famous public works project. Honecker claimed 
that the East German state had a substantial investment in would-be refu- 
gees. He pointed out that allowing them to leave freely would create an 
economic disadvantage for the state, which required their efforts in East 
Germany. 

If you accept the premise that people are or ought to be assets of the state, 
Honecker’s wall made sense. Berlin without a wall was a loophole to the 
Communists, just as escape from U.S. tax jurisdiction was a loophole to 
Clinton’s IRS. Clinton’s arguments about escaping billionaires, aside from 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 131 


showing a politician’s usual disregard for the integrity of numbers, were 
similar in kind to Honecker’s, but somewhat less logical because the U.S. 
government, in fact, does not have a large economic investment in wealthy 
citizens who might seek to flee. It is not a question of their having been 
educated at state expense and wanting to slip away and practice law some- 
where else. The overwhelming majority of those to whom the exit tax would 
apply have created their wealth by their own efforts and in spite of, not 
because of, the U.S. government. 

With the top 1 percent of taxpayers paying 30.2 percent of the total 
income tax in the United States (1995), it is not a question of the rich failing 
to repay any genuine investment the state may have made in their education 
or economic prosperity. To the contrary. Those who pay most of the bills 
pay vastly more than the value of any benefits they receive. With an average 
annual tax payment exceeding $125,000, taxes cost the top 1 percent of 
American taxpayers far more than they now realize. Assuming they could 
earn even a 10 percent return on the excess tax paid by each over a forty-year 
period, each $5,000 of annual excess tax payment reduced their net worth 
by $2.2 million. At a 20 percent rate of return, each $5,000 of excess tax 
reduces net worth by $44 million. 

As the millennium approaches, the new megapolitical conditions of the 
Information Age will make it increasingly obvious that the nation-state 
inherited from the industrial era is a predatory institution. With each year 
that passes, it will seem less a boon to prosperity and more an obstacle, one 
from which the individual will want an escape. It is an escape that desperate 
governments will be loath to allow. The stability and even the survival of 
Western welfare states depends upon their ability to continue extracting a 
huge fraction of the world’s total output for redistribution to a subset of 
voters in the OECD countries. This requires that the taxes imposed upon 
the most productive citizens of the currently rich countries be priced at 
Supermonopoly rates, hundreds or even thousands of times higher than the 
actual cost of the services that governments provide in return. 


THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE NATION-STATE 


The fall of the Berlin Wall was more than just a visible symbol of the death 
of Communism. It was a defeat for the entire world system of nation-states 
and a triumph of efficiency and markets. The fulcrum of power underlying 
history has shifted. We believe that the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 
culminates the era of the nation-state, a peculiar two-hundred-year phase in 
history that began with the French Revolution. States have existed for six 
thousand years. But before the nineteenth century, they accounted for only a 


132 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


small fraction of the world’s sovereignties. Their ascendancy began and 
ended in revolution. The great events of 1789 launched Europe on a course 
toward truly national governments. The great events of 1989 marked the 
death of Communism and an assertion of control by market forces over 
massed power. Those two revolutions, exactly two hundred years apart, 
define the era in which the nation-state predominated in the Great Power 
system. The Great Powers, in turn, dominated the world, spreading or impos- 
ing state systems on even the most remote tribal enclave. 

The triumph of the state as the principal vehicle for organizing violence 
in the world was not a matter of ideology. It was necessitated by the 
hidden logic of violence. It was, as we like to say, a megapolitical event, 
determined not so much by the wishes of theorists and statesmen, or even 
by the maneuvering of generals, as by the hidden leverage of violence, which 
moved history in the way that Archimedes once dreamt of moving the world. 

States have been the norm for the past two hundred years of the modern 
period. But in the longer sweep of history, states have been rare. They 
have always depended upon extraordinary megapolitical conditions for their 
viability. Prior to the modern period, most states were “Oriental despo- 
tisms,” agricultural societies in deserts dependent upon control of irrigation 
systems for their survival. Even the Roman Empire, through its control of 
Egypt and North Africa, was indirectly a hydraulic society. But not enough 
of one to survive. Rome, like most premodern states, ultimately lacked the 
capacity to compel adherence to the monopoly of violence that the ability to 
starve people provides. The Roman state outside of Africa could not cut off 
water for growing crops by denying unsubmissive people access to the 
irrigation system. Such hydraulic systems supplied more leverage to vio- 
lence than any other megapolitical configuration in the ancient economy. 
Whoever controlled the water in these societies could extract spoils at a level 
almost comparable to the percentage of total output absorbed by modern 
nation-states.’ 


Magnitude over Efficiency 


Gunpowder enabled states to expand more easily outside the confines of rice 
paddies and arid river valleys. The nature of gunpowder weapons and the 
character of the industrial economy created great advantages of scale in 
warfare. This led to high and rising returns to violence. As historian Charles 
Tilly put it, “[S]tates having the largest coercive means tended to win wars; 
efficiency (the ratio of output to input) came second to effectiveness (total 
output).”® With governments mostly organized on a large scale, even the 
few small sovereignties that survived, like Monaco or Andorra, needed the 
recognition of the larger states to ensure their independence. Only big gov- 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 133 


ernments with ever-greater command of resources could compete on the 
battlefield. 


The Great Unanswered Question 


This brings us to one of the great unanswered puzzles of modern history: 
why the Cold War that came at the conclusion of the Great Power system 
pitted as its final contenders Communist dictatorships against democratic 
welfare states. This issue has been so little examined that it actually seemed 
plausible to many when a State Department analyst, Francis Fukuyama, 
proclaimed “the end of history” after the Berlin Wall fell. The enthusiastic 
audience his work elicited took too much for granted. Apparently neither 
the author nor many others had bothered to ask a fundamental question: 
What common characteristics of state socialism and welfare-state democra- 
cies led them to be the final contenders for world domination? 

This is an important issue. After all, dozens of contending systems of 
sovereignty have come and gone in the past five centuries, including absolute 
monarchies, tribal enclaves, prince-bishoprics, direct rule by the pope, sul- 
tanates, city-states, and Anabaptist colonies. Today, most people would be 
surprised to learn that a hospital management company, with its own armed 
forces, could rule a country for centuries. Yet something very like that 
happened. For three hundred years after 1228, the Teutonic Knights of 
St. Mary’s Hospital at Jerusalem, later united with the Knights of the Sword 
of Livonia, ruled East Prussia and various territories in Eastern Europe, 
including parts of Lithuania and Poland. Then came the Gunpowder Revolu- 
tion. Within decades, the Teutonic Knights were expelled as sovereigns of 
all their territories and their Grand Master was of no more military impor- 
tance than a chess champion. Why? Why did so many other systems of 
sovereignty dwindle to insignificance while the great struggle for world 
power at the end of the Industrial Age saw mass democracies lined up 
against state socialist systems? 


Unimpeded Control 


Our theory of megapolitics points to the answer. It is rather like asking why 
sumo wrestlers tend to be fat. The answer is that a lean sumo wrestler, 
however impressive his ratio of strength to weight, cannot compete with 
another wrestler who is gigantic. As Tilly suggests, the important issue was 
“effectiveness (total output),” not “efficiency (the ratio of output to input).” 
In an increasingly violent world, the systems that predominated through five 
centuries of competition were necessarily those that facilitated the greatest 
access to resources needed to make war on a large scale. 


134 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


How did this work? 

In the case of Communism, the answer is obvious. Under Communism, 
those who controlled the state controlled almost everything. If you had been 
a citizen of the Soviet Union during the Cold War, the KGB could have 
taken your toothbrush if they had thought it useful for their purposes to do 
so. They could have taken your teeth. According to credible estimates that 
have become more credible since the opening of former Soviet archives in 
1992, secret police and other agents of the late Soviet state took the lives of 
50 million persons in seventy-four years of rule. The state socialist system 
was in a position to mobilize anything that existed within its boundaries for 
its military, with little likelihood that anyone living there would argue. 

In the case of Western democracies, the story is less obvious, partly 
because we are accustomed to think of democracy in stark contrast to Com- 
munism. In terms of the Industrial Age, the two systems were indeed great 
opposites. But seen from the perspective of the Information Age, the two 
systems had more in common than you might suspect. Both facilitated 
unimpeded control of resources by government. The difference was that the 
democratic welfare state placed even greater resources in the hands of the 
state than the state socialist systems. 

This is a clear-cut example of a rare phenomenon, less being more. The 
state socialist system was predicated upon the doctrine that the state owned 
everything. The democratic welfare state, by contrast, made more modest 
claims, and thereby employed superior incentives to mobilize greater output. 
Instead of laying claim to everything in the beginning, governments in the 
West allowed individuals to own property and accumulate wealth. Then, 
after the wealth had been accumulated, the Western nation-states taxed a 
large fraction of it away. Property taxes, income taxes, and estate taxes at 
high levels furnished the democratic welfare state with prodigious quantities 
of resources compared to those available through the state socialist systems. 


Inefficiency, Where It Counted 


Compared to Communism, the welfare state was indeed a far more efficient 
system. But compared to other systems for accumulating wealth, such as a 
genuine laissez-faire enclave like colonial Hong Kong, the welfare state was 
inefficient. Again, less was more. It was precisely this inefficiency that 
made the welfare state supreme during the megapolitical conditions of the 
Industrial Age. 

When you come to understand why, you are much closer to recognizing 
what the fall of the Berlin Wall and the death of Communism really mean. 
Far from assuring that the democratic welfare state will be a triumphant 
system, as has been widely assumed, it was more like seeing that a fraternal 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 135 


twin has died of old age. The same megapolitical revolution that killed 
Communism is also likely to undermine and destroy democratic welfare 
states as we have known them in the twentieth century. 


WHO CONTROLS GOVERNMENT? 


The key to this unorthodox conclusion lies in recognizing where the control 
of democratic government is lodged. It is an issue that is not as simple as it 
may seem. In the modern era, the question of who controls the government 
has almost always been asked as a political question. It has had many 
answers, but almost uniformly these involved identifying the political party, 
group, or faction that dominated the control of a particular state at a particu- 
lar moment. You have heard of governments controlled by capitalists. Gov- 
ernments controlled by labor. Governments controlled by Catholics, and by 
Islamic fundamentalists. Governments controlled by tribal and racial groups; 
governments controlled by Hutus and governments by whites. You have also 
heard of governments controlled by occupational groups, such as lawyers or 
bankers. You have heard of governments controlled by rural interests, by 
big-city machines and by people living in the suburbs. And you have cer- 
tainly heard of governments controlled by political parties, by Democrats, 
Conservatives, Christian Democrats, Liberals, Radicals, Republicans, and 
Socialists. 

But you probably have not heard much about a government controlled by 
its customers. Economic historian Frederic Lane laid the basis for a new 
way of understanding where the control of government lies in some of his 
lucid essays on the economic consequences of violence discussed earlier. 
Thinking about government as an economic unit that sells protection led 
Lane to analyze the control of government in economic rather than political 
terms. In this view, there are three basic alternatives in the control of govern- 
ment, each of which entails a fundamentally different set of incentives: 
proprietors, employees, and customers. 


Proprietors 


In rare cases, even today, governments are sometimes controlled by a propri- 
etor, usually a hereditary leader who for all intents and purposes owns the 
country. For example, the Sultan of Brunei treats the government of Brunei 
somewhat like a proprietorship. This was more common among lords of the 
Middle Ages, who treated their fiefs as proprietorships to optimize their 
incomes. 


136 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Lane described the incentives of “the owners of the production-producing 
enterprise” as follows: 


An interest in maximizing profits would lead him, while maintaining prices, 
to try to reduce his costs. He would, like Henry VII of England or Louis XI of 
France, use inexpensive wiles, at least as inexpensive devices as possible, to 
affirm his legitimacy, to maintain domestic order, and to distract neighboring 
princes so that his own military expenses would be low. From lowered costs, 
or from the increased exactions made possible by the firmness of his monopoly, 
or from a combination, he accumulated a surplus. ...”° 


Governments controlled by proprietors have strong incentives to reduce the 
costs of providing protection or monopolizing violence in a given area. But 
so long as their rule is secure, they have little incentive to reduce the price 
(tax) they charge their customers below the rate that optimizes revenues. 
The higher the price a monopolist can charge, and the lower his actual costs, 
the greater the profit he will make. The ideal fiscal policy for a government 
controlled by its proprietors would be a huge surplus. When governments 
can keep their revenues high but cut their costs, this has a large impact on 
the use of resources. Labor and other valuable inputs that would otherwise 
be wasted providing unnecessarily expensive protection become available 
instead for investment and other purposes. The higher the monarch can raise 
his profit by lowering costs, the more resources are freed. When these 
resources are used for investment, they provide a stimulus for growth. But 
even if they are used for conspicuous consumption, they help create and 
feed new markets that otherwise would not exist if the resources had been 
wasted to produce inefficient “protection.” 


Employees 


It is easy to characterize the incentives that prevail for governments con- 
trolled by their employees. They would be similar incentives in other 
employee-controlled organizations. First and foremost, employee-run orga- 
nizations tend to favor any policy that increases employment and oppose 
measures which reduce jobs. As Lane put it, “When employees as a whole 
controlled, they had little interest in minimizing the amounts exacted for 
protection and none in minimizing that large part of costs represented by 
labor costs, by their own salaries. Maximizing size was more to their taste 
also.” !° A government controlled by its employees would seldom have in- 
centives to either reduce the costs of government or the price charged to 
their customers. However, where conditions impose strong price resistance, 
in the form of opposition to higher taxes, governments controlled by employ- 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 137 


ees would be more likely to let their revenues fall below their outlays than 
to cut their outlays. In other words, their incentives imply that they may be 
inclined toward chronic deficits, as governments controlled by proprietors 
would not be. 


Customers 


Are there examples of governments controlled by their customers? Yes. Lane 
was inspired to analyze the control of government in economic terms by the 
example of the medieval merchant republics, like Venice. There a group 
of wholesale merchants who required protection effectively controlled the 
government for centuries. They were genuinely customers for the protection 
service government provided, not proprietors. They paid for the service. 
They did not seek to profit from their control of government’s monopoly of 
violence. If some did, they were prevented from doing so by the other 
customers for long periods of time. Other examples of governments con- 
trolled by their customers include democracies and republics with limited 
franchise, such as the ancient democracies, or the American republic in its 
founding period. At that time, only those who paid for the government, 
about 10 percent of the population, were allowed to vote. 

Governments controlled by their customers, like those of proprietors, have 
incentives to reduce their operating costs as far as possible. But unlike 
governments controlled by either proprietors or employees, governments 
actually controlled by their customers have incentives to hold down the 
prices they charge. Where customers rule, governments are lean and gener- 
ally unobtrusive, with low operating costs, minimal employment, and low 
taxes. A government controlled by its customers sets tax rates not to optimize 
the amount the government can collect but rather to optimize the amount 
that the customers can retain. Like typical enterprises in competitive mar- 
kets, even a monopoly controlled by its customers would be compelled to 
move toward efficiency. It would not be able to charge a price, in the form 
of taxes, that exceeded costs by more than a bare margin. 


THE ROLE OF DEMOCRACY: VOTERS AS EMPLOYEES AND 
CUSTOMERS 


Lane treats democracy in the conventional way in assuming that it brings 
violence-using and violence-producing enterprises “increasingly under the 
control of their customers.” '! This is certainly the politically correct conclu- 
sion. But is it true? We think not. Look closely at how modern democracies 
function. 


138 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


First of all, they have few characteristics of those competitive industries 
where the terms of trade are clearly controlled by their customers. For one 
thing, democratic governments typically spend only a bare fraction of their 
total outlays on the service of protection, which is their core activity. In the 
United States, for example, state and local governments spend just 3.5 per- 
cent of their total outlays on the provision of police, as well as courts and 
prisons. Add military spending, and the fraction of revenues devoted to 
protection is still only about 10 percent. Another revealing hint that mass 
democracy is not controlled by its customers is the fact that contemporary 
political culture, inherited from the Industrial Age, would consider it outra- 
geous if policies on crucial issues were actually informed by the interests of 
the people who pay the bills. Imagine the uproar if a U.S. president or a 
British prime minister proposed to allow the group of citizens who pay the 
majority of the taxes to determine which programs of government should 
continue and which groups of employees should be fired. This would deeply 
offend expectations of how government should operate, in a way that 
allowing government employees to determine whose taxes should be raised 
would not. 

Yet when you think about it, when customers really are in the driver’s seat 
it would be considered outrageous that they should not get what they want. 
If you went into a store to buy furniture, and the salespeople took your 
money but then proceeded to ignore your requests and consult others about 
how to spend your money, you would quite rightly be upset. You would not 
think it normal or justifiable if the employees of the store argued that you 
really did not deserve the furniture, and that it should be shipped instead to 
someone whom they found more worthy. The fact that something very 
like this happens in dealings with government shows how little control its 
“customers” actually have. 

By any measure, the costs of democratic government have surged out of 
control, unlike the typical situation where customer preferences force ven- 
dors to be efficient. Most democracies run chronic deficits. This is a fiscal 
policy characteristic of control by employees. Governments seem notably 
resistant to reducing the costs of their operations. An almost universal com- 
plaint about contemporary government worldwide is that political programs, 
once established, can be curtailed only with great difficulty. To fire a govern- 
ment employee is all but impossible. In fact, one of the principal advantages 
arising from privatization of formerly state-owned functions is that private 
control usually makes it far easier to weed out unnecessary employment. 
From Britain to Argentina, it has not been uncommon for the new private 
managers to shed 50—95 percent of former state employees. 

Think, as well, of the basis upon which the fiscal terms of government’s 
protection service is priced. For the most part, you would look in vain for 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 139 


hints of competitive influences on tax rates according to which government 
services are priced. Even the occasional debates about lowering taxes that 
have interrupted normal political discourse in recent years betray how far 
removed democratic government has normally been from control by its 
customers. Advocates of lower taxes sometimes have argued that govern- 
ment revenues would actually increase because rates previously had been set 
so high that they discouraged economic activity. 

The trade-off they normally intended to highlight was not competition 
between jurisdictions but something much more amazing. They did not 
argue that because tax rates in Hong Kong were only 15 percent, rates in the 
United States or Germany must be no higher than 15 percent. To the con- 
trary. Tax debates have normally assumed that the trade-off facing the tax- 
payer was not between doing business in one jurisdiction or doing it in 
another, but between doing business at penal rates or taking a holiday. You 
were told that productive individuals subject to predatory taxation would 
walk away from their in-boxes and go golfing if their tax burdens were not 
eased. 

The fact that such an argument could even arise shows how far removed 
from a competitive footing the protection costs imposed by democratic wel- 
fare states have been. The terms of progressive income taxation, which 
emerged in every democratic welfare state during the course of the twentieth 
century, are dramatically unlike pricing provisions that would be preferred 
by customers. This can easily be seen by comparing taxation imposed to 
support a monopolistic provision of protection with tariffs for telephone 
service, which until recently was a monopoly in most places. Customers 
would scream bloody murder if a telephone company attempted to charge 
for calls on the same basis that income taxes are imposed. Suppose the 
phone company sent a bill for $50,000 for a call to London, just because 
you happened to conclude a deal worth $125,000 during a conversation. 
Neither you nor any other customer in his right mind would pay it. But that 
is exactly the basis upon which income taxes are assessed in every demo- 
cratic welfare state. 

When you think closely about the terms under which industrial democra- 
cies have operated, it is more logical to treat them as a form of government 
controlled by their employees. Thinking of mass democracy as government 
controlled by its employees helps explain the difficulty of changing govern- 
ment policy. Government in many respects appears to be run for the benefit 
of employees. For example, government schools in most democratic coun- 
tries seem to malfunction chronically and without remedy. If customers truly 
were in the driver’s seat, they would find it easier to set new policy directions. 
Those who pay for democratic government seldom set the terms of govern- 
ment spending. Instead, government functions as a co-op that is both outside 


140 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


of proprietary control and operating as a natural monopoly. Prices bear little 
relation to costs. The quality of service is generally low compared to that in 
private enterprise. Customer grievances are hard to remedy. In short, mass 
democracy leads to control of government by its “employees.” 

But wait. You may be saying that in most jurisdictions there are many 
more voters than there are persons on the government payroll. How could it 
be possible for employees to dominate under such conditions? The welfare 
state emerged to answer exactly this quandary. Since there were not other- 
wise enough employees to create a working majority, increasing numbers of 
voters were effectively put on the payroll to receive transfer payments of all 
kinds. In effect, the recipients of transfer payments and subsidies became 
pseudo employees of government who were able to dispense with the bother 
of reporting every day to work. It was a result dictated by the megapolitical 
logic of the industrial age. 

When the magnitude of coercive force is more important than the efficient 
deployment of resources, as was the case prior to 1989, it is all but impossi- 
ble for most governments to be controlled by their customers. As the exam- 
ple of the late Soviet Union illustrated so well, until a few years ago it was 
possible for states to exercise great power in the world even while wasting 
resources on a massive scale. When returns to violence are high and rising, 
magnitude means more than efficiency. Larger entities tend to prevail over 
smaller ones. Those governments that are more effective in mobilizing mili- 
tary resources, even at the cost of wasting many of them, tend to prevail over 
those that utilize resources more efficiently. 

Think what this means. It inescapably implies that when magnitude means 
more than efficiency, governments controlled by their customers cannot 
prevail, and often, cannot survive. Under such conditions, the entities that 
will be most effectively militarily are those that commandeer the most re- 
sources for war. But governments that are truly controlled by their customers 
who pay their bills are unlikely to have carte blanche to reach into the 
pockets of everyone to extract resources. 

Customers normally wish to see the prices they pay for any product or 
service, including protection, lowered and kept under control. If the Western 
democracies had been under customer control during the Cold War, that fact 
alone would have made them weaker competitors militarily, because it would 
almost certainly have curtailed the flow of resources into the government. 
Remember, where customers rule, both prices and costs should be expected 
to be under tight control. But this is hardly what happened. The welfare 
states were manifestly the winners of the spending contest during the Cold 
War. Commentators of all stripes cited as a factor in their triumph their 
ability to spend the Soviet Union into bankruptcy. 

It is precisely this fact that highlights the way in which the inefficiencies 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 141 


of democracy made it megapolitically predominant during a period of rising 
returns to violence. Massive military spending, with all its waste, represents 
a distinctly suboptimal deployment of capital for private gain. We suggested 
earlier that while welfare states were economically efficient as compared to 
state socialist systems, they are far less efficient for the creation of wealth 
than /aissez-faire enclaves, like Hong Kong. Ironically, it was this very 
inefficiency of the democratic welfare state as compared to a more unencum- 
bered free-market system that made it successful—in the megapolitical con- 
ditions of industrialism. 

How did inefficiency fostered by democracy become a factor in its success 
during the Age of Violence? The key to unraveling this apparent paradox 
lies in recognizing two points: 

1. Success for a sovereignty in the modern period lay not in creating 
wealth but in creating a military force capable of deploying overpowering 
violence against any other state. Money was needed to do that, but money 
itself could not win a battle. The challenge was not to create a system with 
the most efficient economy or the most rapid rate of growth, but to create a 
system that could extract more resources and channel them into the military. 
By its nature, military spending is an area where the financial returns per se 
are low or nonexistent. 

2. The easiest way to obtain permission to invest funds in activities with 
little or no direct financial return, like tax payments, is to ask for permission 
from someone other than the person whose money is coveted. One of the 
ways that the Dutch were able to purchase Manhattan for twenty-three dol- 
lars’ worth of beads is that the particular Indians to whom they made the 
offer were not the ones who properly owned it. “Getting to yes,” as the 
marketing people say, is much easier under those terms. Suppose, for exam- 
ple, that as authors of this book we wanted you to pay not its cover price but 
40 percent of your annual income for a copy. We would be far likelier to get 
permission to do so if we asked someone else, and did not have to ask you. 
In fact, we would be far more persuasive if we could rely instead upon the 
consent of several people you do not even know. We could hold an ad hoc 
election, what H. L. Mencken described, with less exaggeration than he 
might have thought, as “an advanced auction of stolen goods.” And to make 
the example more realistic, we would agree to share some of the money we 
collected from you with these anonymous bystanders in exchange for their 
support. 

That is the role the modern democratic welfare state evolved to fulfill. It 
was an unsurpassed system in the Industrial Age because it was both effi- 
cient and inefficient where it counted. It combined the efficiency of private 
ownership and incentives for the creation of wealth with a mechanism to 
facilitate essentially unchecked access to that wealth. Democracy kept the 


142 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


pockets of wealth producers open. It succeeded militarily during the high- 
water period of rising returns to violence in the world precisely because it 
made it difficult for customers to effectively restrict the taxes the government 
collected or other ways of funding the outlay of resources for the military, 
such as inflation. 


Why Customers Could Not Dominate 


Those who paid for “protection” during the modern period were not in a 
position to successfully deny resources to the sovereign, even acting collec- 
tively, when doing so would simply have exposed them to being overpowered 
by other, possibly more hostile states. This was an obvious consideration 
during the Cold War. The customers, or taxpayers, who bore a disproportion- 
ate share of the cost of government in the leading Western industrial states 
were in no position to refuse to pay hefty taxes. The result would have been 
to expose themselves to total confiscation by the Soviet Union or another 
aggressive group capable of organizing violence. 


Industrialism and Democracy 


Taking a longer view, mass democracy may prove to be an anachronism that 
will not long survive the end of the Industrial Age. Certainly, mass democ- 
racy and the nation-state emerged together with the French Revolution at the 
end of the eighteenth century, probably as a response to a surge in real 
income. Incomes had begun to rise significantly in Western Europe about 
1750, partly as a result of warmer weather. This coincided with a period of 
technological innovation that displaced skilled jobs of artisans with equip- 
ment that could be operated by unskilled workers, even women and children. 
This new industrial equipment raised earnings for unskilled workers, making 
the income distribution more equal. 

The crucial trigger point of revolution may not have been, as is often 
thought, the perverse idea that people tend to revolt when conditions im- 
prove. More important may be the fact that when incomes had risen to a 
certain level, it at last became practical for the early-modern state to circum- 
vent the private intermediaries and powerful magnates with whom they had 
previously bargained for resources, and move to a system of “direct rule” in 
which a national government dealt directly with individual citizens, taxing 
them at ever higher rates and demanding poorly compensated military ser- 
vice in exchange for provision of various benefits.!” 

Because the emerging middle class soon had enough money to tax, it was 
no longer essential, as it previously had been, for rulers to negotiate with 
powerful landlords or great merchants who were, as historian Charles Tilly 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 143 


wrote, “in a position to prevent the creation of a powerful state” that would 
“seize their assets and cramp their transactions.” '* It is easy to see why 
governments were more successful in extracting resources when they dealt 
with millions of citizens individually rather than with a relative handful 
of lords, dukes, earls, bishops, contract mercenaries, free cities, and other 
semisovereign entities with whom the rulers of European states were obliged 
to negotiate prior to the mid-eighteenth century. 

Rising real incomes allowed governments to adopt a strategy that placed 
more resources under their control. Small sums taken in taxes from millions 
could produce more revenue than larger amounts paid by a few powerful 
people. What is more, the many were far easier to deal with than the few, 
who were generally unwilling to give their money away and were far better 
placed to resist. 

After all, the typical farmer, small merchant, or worker possessed van- 
ishingly small resources as compared to the state itself. It was not even 
remotely possible that the typical private individual in Western Europe on 
the eve of the French Revolution could have effectively bargained with the 
state to reduce his tax rate, or mounted an effective resistance to government 
plans and policies that threatened his interests. But this is precisely what 
powerful private magnates had done for centuries and would continue to do. 
They effectively resisted and bargained with rulers, restraining their ability 
to commandeer resources. 


“Going to war accelerated the move from indirect to direct rule. Almost any 
state that makes war finds that it cannot pay for the effort from its accumulated 
reserves and current revenues. Almost all warmaking states borrow exten- 
sively, raise taxes, and seize the means of combat—including men—from 
reluctant citizens who have other uses for their resources.” 


—CHARLES TILLY 


The example of Poland in the mid-eighteenth century illustrates this per- 
fectly. In 1760, the Polish national army comprised eighteen thousand sol- 
diers. This was a meager force compared to the armies commanded by rulers 
of neighboring Austria, Prussia, and Russia, the least of whom could control 
a standing army of 100,000 soldiers. In fact, the Polish national army in 
1760 was small even in comparison with other units under arms within 
Poland. The combined forces of the Polish nobility were thirty thousand 
men, '° 

If the Polish king had been able to interact directly with millions of 
individual Poles and tax them directly, rather than being limited to extracting 


144 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


resources indirectly through the contributions of the powerful Polish mag- 
nates, there is little doubt that the Polish central government would have 
been in a position to raise far more revenues, and thus pay for a larger army. 

Against ordinary individuals, who were not in a position to act in concert 
with millions of other ordinary individuals, the central authorities were to 
prove irresistibly powerful everywhere. But the king of Poland lacked the 
option of directly taxing his citizens in 1760. He had to deal through the 
lords, wealthy merchants, and other notables, who were a small, cohesive 
group. They could and did act in concert to keep the king from comman- 
deering their resources without their consent. Given that the Polish nobility 
had far more troops than he did, the king was in no position to insist. 

As it turned out, the military disadvantage of failing to circumvent the 
wealthy and powerful in gathering resources was decisive in the Age of 
Violence. Within a few years, Poland ceased to exist as an independent 
country. It was conquered by invasions from Austria, Prussia, and Russia, 
three countries with armies each of which was many times bigger than 
Poland’s small force. In each of those countries, the rulers had found paths 
to circumvent the capacity of the wealthy merchants and the nobility to limit 
the commandeering of their resources. 


After the French Revolution 


The French Revolution resulted in an even greater surge in the size of 
armies, a fact that demonstrated the strength of the democratic strategy when 
returns to violence were rising. The bargain governments struck from the 
French Revolution onward was to provide am unprecedented degree of 
involvement in the lives of average people, in exchange for their participa- 
tion in wars in place of mercenaries, and paying a growing burden of taxes 
from their rising incomes. 
As Tilly said, 


The state’s sphere expanded far beyond its military core, and its citizens began 
to make claims on it for a very wide range of protection, adjudication, 
production, and distribution. As national legislatures extended their own 
ranges well beyond the approval of taxation, they became the targets of claims 
from all well-organized groups whose interests the state did or could affect. 
Direct rule and mass national politics grew up together, and reinforced each 
other mightily.'® 


The same logic that was true in the eighteenth century remained true until 
1989, when the Berlin Wall fell. As the Industrial Age advanced, incomes 
for unskilled work continued to rise, making mass democracy an even more 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 145 


effective method of optimizing the extraction of resources. As a result, 
government grew and grew, adding about 0.5 percent to its total claims on 
annual income in the average industrial country over the twentieth century. 

During the Industrial Age prior to 1989, democracy emerged as the most 
militarily effective form of government precisely because democracy made 
it difficult or impossible to impose effective limits on the commandeering of 
resources by the state. Generous provision of welfare benefits to one and all 
invited a majority of voters to become, in effect, employees of the govern- 
ment. This became the predominant political feature of all leading industrial 
countries because voters were in a weak position to effectively control the 
government in their role as customers for the service of protection. Not only 
did they face the aggressive menace of Communist systems, which could 
produce large resources for military purposes since the state controlled the 
entire economy, but true taxpayer control of government was also impractical 
for another reason. 

Millions of average citizens cannot work together effectively to protect 
their interests. Because the obstacles to their cooperation are high, and the 
return to any individual for successfully defending the group’s common 
interests is minimal, millions of ordinary citizens will not be as successful 
in withholding their assets from the government as will smaller groups with 
more favorable incentives. 

Other things being equal, therefore, you would expect a higher proportion 
of total resources to be commandeered by government in a mass democracy 
than in an oligarchy, or in a system of fragmented sovereignty where mag- 
nates wielded military power and fielded their own armies, as they did 
everywhere in early-modern Europe prior to the eighteenth century. 

Thus a crucial though seldom examined reason for the growth of democ- 
racy in the Western world is the relative importance of negotiation costs at a 
time when returns to violence were rising. It was always costlier to draw 
resources from the few than from the many. 

A relatively small, elite group of rich represent a more coherent and 
effective body than a large mass of citizens. The small group has stronger 
incentives to work together. It will almost inevitably be more effective at 
protecting its interests than will a mass group.'!? And even if most members 
of the group choose not to cooperate with any common action, a few 
who are rich may be capable of deploying enough resources to get the job 
done. 

With democratic decision-making, the nation-state could exercise power 
much more completely over millions of persons, who could not easily coop- 
erate to act collectively in their own behalf, than it could in dealings with a 
much smaller number who could more easily overcome the organizational 
difficulties of defending their concentrated interests. Democracy had the still 


146 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


more compelling advantage of creating a legitimizing decision rule that 
allowed the state to tap the resources of the well-to-do without having to 
bargain directly for their permission. In short, democracy as a decision 
mechanism was well fitted to the megapolitical conditions of the Industrial 
Age. It complemented the nation-state because it facilitated the concentra- 
tion of military power in the hands of those running it at a time when the 
magnitude of force brought to bear was more important than the efficiency 
with which it was mobilized. 

This was demonstrated decisively with the French Revolution, which 
raised the magnitude of military force on the battlefield. Thereafter, other 
competitive nation-states had little choice but to converge on a similar orga- 
nization, with legitimacy ultimately tied to democratic decision-making. 

To summarize, the democratic nation-state succeeded during the past two 
centuries for these hidden reasons: 


1. There were rising returns to violence that made magnitude of force more 
important than efficiency as a governing principle. 

2. Incomes rose sufficiently above subsistence that it became possible for 
the state to collect large amounts of total resources without having to 
negotiate with powerful magnates who were capable of resisting. 

3. Democracy proved sufficiently compatible with the operation of free 
markets to be conducive to the generation of increasing amounts of 
wealth. 

4. Democracy facilitated domination of government by its “employees,” 
thereby assuring that it would be difficult to curtail expenditures, includ- 
ing military expenditures. 7 : 

5. Democracy as a decision-rule proved to be an effective antidote to the 
ability of the wealthy to act in concert to restrict the nation-state’s ability 
to tax or otherwise protect their assets from invasion. 


Democracy became the militarily winning strategy because it facilitated 
the gathering of more resources into the hands of the state. Compared to 
other styles of sovereignty that depended for their legitimacy on other princi- 
ples, such as the feudal levy, the divine right of kings, corporate religious 
duty, or the voluntary contributions of the rich, mass democracy became 
militarily the most potent because it was the surest way to gather resources 
in an industrial economy. 


“The nation, as a culturally defined community, is the highest symbolic value 
of modernity; it has been endowed with a quasi-sacred character equalled 
only by religion. In fact, this quasi-sacred character derives from religion. In 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 147 


practice, the nation has become either the modern, secular substitute of reli- 
gion or its most powerful ally. In modern times the communal sentiments 
generated by the nation are highly regarded and sought after as the basis for 
group loyalty. ... That the modern state is often the beneficiary should hardly 
be surprising given its paramount power.’ '8 


—JOSEP R. LLOBERA 


Nationalism 


Much the same can be said of nationalism, which became a corollary to 
mass democracy. States that could employ nationalism found that they could 
mobilize larger armies at a smaller cost. Nationalism was an invention that 
enabled a state to increase the scale at which it was militarily effective. Like 
politics itself, nationalism is mostly a modern invention. As sociologist 
Josep Llobera has shown in his richly documented book on the rise of 
nationalism, the nation is an imagined community that in large measure 
came into being as a way of mobilizing state power during the French 
Revolution. As he puts it, “In the modern sense of the term, national con- 
sciousness has only existed since the French Revolution, since the time when 
in 1789 the Constituent Assembly equated the people of France with the 
French nation.” !° 

Nationalism made it easier to mobilize power and control large numbers 
of people. Nation-states formed by underlining and emphasizing characteris- 
tics that people held in common, particularly spoken language. This facili- 
tated rule without the intervention of intermediaries. It simplified the tasks 
of bureaucracy. Edicts that need only be promulgated in one language can 
be dispatched more quickly and with less confusion than those that must be 
translated into a Babel of tongues. Nationalism, therefore, tended to lower 
the cost of controlling larger areas. Before nationalism, the early-modern 
state required the aid of lords, dukes, earls, bishops, free cities, and other 
corporate and ethnic intermediaries, from tax “farmers” to military contract 
merchants and mercenaries to collect revenues, raise troops and conduct 
other government functions. 

Nationalism also decisively lowered the costs of mobilizing military per- 
sonnel by encouraging group identification with the interests of the state. 
There was such a substantial advantage in harnessing group feeling to the 
interests of the state that most states, even the allegedly internationalist 
Soviet Union, converged on nationalism as a complementary ideology. 

Seen in a longer perspective, nationalism is as much an anomaly as 
the state itself. As historian William McNeill has documented, polyethnic 
sovereignties were the norm in the past.2° In McNeill’s words, “The idea that 


148 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


a government rightfully should rule only over citizens of a single ethnos 
started to develop in Western Europe towards the end of the Middle Ages.” ?! 
An early nationalist entity was the Prussian League (Preussicher Bund), 
which formed in 1440 in opposition to rule by the Teutonic Order. Some of 
the characteristics of the order were highlighted earlier as a polar example 
of a sovereignty unlike the nation-state. The Teutonic Order was a kind of 
chartered company almost none of whose members were native to Prussia. 
Its headquarters shifted at various times from Bremen and Ltibeck to Jerusa- 
lem to Acre to Venice and on to Marienberg on the Vistula. At one time it 
ruled the district of Burzenland in Transylvania. It is not surprising that a 
sovereignty so unlike a state would became the object of one of the early 
attempts to mobilize national feeling as a factor in organizing power. How- 
ever, as an indication of how different early nationalism was from later 
varieties, the German-speaking nobles of the Prussian League petitioned the 
king of Poland to place Prussia under Polish rule, largely because even then 
the Polish king was a relatively weak monarch who was not expected to rule 
with the same rigor as the Teutonic Order. 

Nationalism, in its early incarnations, came into play just prior to the 
Gunpowder Revolution. It continued to develop as the early-modern state 
developed, taking a quantum leap in importance at the time of the French 
Revolution. We believe that nationalism as an idea of force has already 
begun to recede. It probably reached its heyday with Woodrow Wilson’s 
attempt to endow every ethnic group in Europe with its own state at the 
close of World War I. It is now a reactionary force, inflamed in places with 
falling incomes and declining prospects like Serbia. 

As we explore later, we expect nationalism to be a major rallying theme 
of persons with low skills nostalgic for compulsion as the welfare state 
collapses in the Western democracies. You haven’t seen anything yet. For 
most persons in the West the fallout from the death of Communism has 
seemed relatively benign. You have seen a drop in military spending, a 
plunge in aluminum prices, and a new source of hockey players for the 
NHL. That is the good news. It is news that most people who came of age 
in the twentieth century could applaud, especially if they are hockey fans. 
Most of the news that is destined to prove less popular is still to come. 

With the passage of the Industrial Age, the megapolitical conditions that 
democracy satisfied are rapidly ceasing to exist. Therefore, it is doubtful 
that mass democracy and the welfare state will survive long in the new 
megapolitical conditions of the Information Age. 


“Congress was not a temple of democracy, it was a market for bartering laws.” 


— ALBERTO FUJIMORI, president of Peru 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 149 


Indeed, future historians may report that we have already seen the first 
postmodern coup—the remarkable padlocking of the congress in Peru in 
1993. This was hardly an event that attracted much favorable notice in the 
leading industrial democracies. But it may turn out to mean more in the 
fullness of time than conventional analysts would suggest. The few who 
have thought about it tend to see it as just another power grab of the kind 
that has become depressingly familiar in the history of Latin America. But 
we see it as perhaps the first step toward delegitimizing a form of governance 
whose immediate megapolitical reason for being has begun to disappear 
with the transition to the Information Age. Fujimori’s closure of the congress 
is a symptom of the ultimate devaluation of political promises. A similar 
fate could await other legislatures when their credit is exhausted. 

The shift in technology that is eroding industrialism has trapped many 
countries with governments that no longer work. Or work badly. Legisla- 
tures, in particular, appear to be increasingly dysfunctional. They grind out 
laws that might have been merely stupid fifty years ago but are dangerous 
today. This was spectacularly obvious in Peru, where the internal sovereignty 
of the state had almost collapsed by 1993. 


“Attacks, kidnappings, rapes and murders have coincided with increasingly 
aggressive driving habits and unsafe streets. The police have gradually lost 
control of the situation and some of their members have been involved in 
scandals and become seasoned criminals. ... People have gradually grown 
used to living outside the law. Theft, illegal seizure and factory takeovers have 
become everyday occurrences. ... ”” 


—HERNANDO DE SOTO 


Peru in Ruins 


In a sense, Peru was no longer a modern nation-state in 1993. It still had a 
flag and an army, but most of its institutions lay in ruins. Even the prisons 
had been taken over by the inmates. This disintegration could be traced to a 
number of causes, but most expert attempts to explain it miss the real point. 
Peru was an early casualty of the technological change that is making closed 
economies dysfunctional and undermining central authority everywhere. 
These megapolitical stresses are compounded because decision-making in- 
stitutions like the Peruvian congress are trapped by perverse incentives into 
aggravating the very problems that they most need to solve. 

Representative democracy in Peru was like a pair of loaded dice. As a 
decision mechanism for aggrandizing the state, it was unsurpassed. But 
when new circumstances called for devolving power, the inherent biases that 


150 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


made democracy so useful under the old megapolitical conditions made it 
increasingly dysfunctional. The very laws passed by the congress were rap- 
idly destroying any foundation of value or respect for the law. As de Soto 
put it in The Other Path, “Small interest groups fight among themselves, 
cause bankruptcies, implicate public officials. Governments hand out privi- 
leges. The law is used to give and take away far more than morality per- 
mits.” 23 A congress like that in Peru, entirely in thrall to special-interest 
groups, has all the moral stature of a gang of fences auctioning off stolen 
goods. It made the free market illegal, and consequently made the law 
ridiculous. As de Soto writes of the pre-Fujimori period: 


A complete subversion of ends and means has turned the life of Peruvian 
society upside down, to the point that there are acts which, although officially 
criminal, are no longer condemned by the collective consciousness. Smuggling 
is a caSe in point. Everyone, from the aristocratic lady to the humblest man, 
acquires smuggled goods. No one has scruples about it; on the contrary, it is 
viewed as a kind of challenge to individual ingenuity or as revenge against the 
state. 

This infiltration of violence and criminality into everyday life has been 
accompanied by increasing poverty and deprivation. In general terms, Peruvi- 
ans’ real average income had declined steadily over the last ten years and is 
now at the level of twenty years ago. Mountains of garbage pile up on all 
sides. Night and day, legions of beggars, car washers, and scavengers besiege 
passersby, asking for money. The mentally ill swarm naked in the streets, 
stinking of urine. Children, single mothers, and cripples beg for alms on every 
corner. 

... The traditional centralism of our society has proved clearly incapable 
of satisfying the manifold needs of a country in transition.*4 


De Soto described the abandonment of the grotesque legal economy for 
the black market that was under way before Fujimori padlocked the congress 
as “an invisible revolution.” 

We are positive about the benefits of the free market, but much less 
positive about the promise of a society in which the law is as degraded as 
the money. The world that de Soto described in Peru prior to 1993 was a 
“Clockwork Orange” world, where overly centralized and dysfunctional 
government institutions were literally destroying the civil society. 

This is what Fujimori set out to change. He had slashed inflation by 
turning off the printing presses. He had also managed to fire fifty thousand 
government employees, and to trim some subsidies. He had made a start 
toward balancing the budget. His program of reform included comprehen- 
sive plans to create free markets and privatize industry. But as in the former 
Soviet Union, most of the important elements of Fujimori’s reform were yet 


' 


The Life and Death of the Nation-State 151 


to be adopted in 1993, including the first round of large-scale privatization 
of state banks, mining companies, and utilities. Instead of enacting these 
necessary proposals, Peru’s congress, like the Russian congress that chal- 
lenged Yeltsin’s reforms in Moscow, sought to move backwards. Their plan: 
restore subsidies from an empty treasury, pad the payroll, and protect any 
and all vested interests, especially the bureaucracy—exactly what you would 
expect of a government controlled by its employees. 

Fujimori claimed that the congress of Peru was dithering and corrupt, a 
fact with which almost everyone agreed. He further claimed that congres- 
sional dithering and corruption made it impossible to reform Peru’s collaps- 
ing economy or combat a violent assault by narco-terrorists and nihilistic 
Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) guerrillas. 


The 70 Percent Solution 


So Fujimori closed the Congress, an act that might have indicated that he 
was as authoritarian as many earlier Latin American leaders. But we thought, 
and said so at the time, that Fujimori had correctly identified a fundamental 
impediment to reform. The extravagant official elegies for the Peruvian 
congress by American editorial writers and officials of the State Department 
were not shared by the people of Peru. While North Americans carried on 
as if Peru’s congress were the incarnation of freedom and civilization, the 
Peruvian people cheered. President Fujimori’s popularity shot up above 70 
percent when he sent the congress home. And he was later reelected to a 
second term in a landslide. Most citizens apparently saw their legislature 
more as an obstacle to their well-being than as an expression of their rights. 
In 1994, real economic growth in Peru reached 12.9 percent, the highest on 
the planet. 


Defiation of Political Promises 


We saw Peru’s turmoil less as a throwback to the dictatorships of the past 
than as an early installment of a broader transition crisis. You can expect to 
see crises of misgovernment in many countries as political promises are 
deflated and governments run out of credit. Ultimately, new institutional 
forms will have to emerge that are capable of preserving freedom in the new 
technological conditions, while at the same time giving expression and life 
to the common interests that all citizens share. 

Few have begun to think about the incompatibility between some of the 
_ institutions of industrial government and the megapolitics of postindustrial 
society. Whether these contradictions are explicitly acknowledged or not, 
however, their consequences will become increasingly obvious as examples 


152 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


of political failure compound around the world. Institutions of government 
that emerged in the modern period reflect the megapolitical conditions of one 
or more centuries ago. The Information Age will require new mechanisms of 
representation to avoid chronic dysfunction and even social collapse. 

When the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, it not only signaled the end of the 
Cold War; it was also the outer sign of a silent earthquake in the foundations 
of power in the world. It was the end of the long period of rising returns to 
violence. The fall of Communism, which we forecast in 1987 in Blood in 
the Streets and even earlier in our monthly newsletter, Strategic Investment, 
was not merely the repudiation of an ideology. It was the outward marker of 
the most important development in the history of violence over the past five 
centuries. If our analysis is correct, the organization of society is bound to 
change to reflect growing diseconomies of scale in the employment of vio- 
lence. The boundaries within which the future must lie have been redrawn. 


CHAPTER 6 


THE MEGAPULITCs 
UF THE 
INFORMATION AGE 


The Triumph of 


Efficiency over Power 


“... it is computerized information, not manpower or mass production 
that increasingly drives the U.S. economy and that will win wars in a 
world wired for 500 TV channels. The computerized information exists 
in cyberspace—the new dimension created by endless reproduction of 
computer networks, satellites, modems, databases and the public In- 
ternet.”' 


—NEIL MUNRO 


On December 30, 1936, auto workers angling for higher pay forcibly seized 
two of General Motors’ main plants at Flint, Michigan. They idled machines, 
turned off the assembly lines, and made themselves at home. Workers who 
had been employed to operate the factories sat down in an industrial confron- 
tation that was to last for many weeks. It was a drama punctuated by violent 
riots and the fluctuating allegiances of the police, the Michigan militia, and 
political figures at all levels of government. Seeing little progress in forcing 
their demands, the union struck again on February 1, 1937. Union activists 
forcibly took over GM’s Chevrolet factory in Flint. By occupying and closing 


154. THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


General Motors’ key factories, the workers effectively paralyzed the com- 
pany’s productive capacity. In the ten days following the seizure of the third 
plant, GM produced only 153 automobiles in the United States. 

We revisit this news flash from sixty years ago to place the revolution in 
megapolitical conditions now under way into clearer perspective. The GM 
sitdown strike happened within the lifetimes of some readers of this book. 
Yet we believe that sit-down strikes will prove as anachronistic in the Infor- 
mation Age as slaves slogging across the desert with giant stones in tow to 
erect funeral pyramids for the pharaohs. While labor unions and their tactics 
of intimidation became so familiar in the industrial period as to be an 
unquestioned part of the social landscape, they depended upon special mega- 
political conditions that are rapidly fading away. There will be no Chevrolets 
and no UAW to strike on the Information Superhighway. 

The fortunes of governments will follow those of their counterparts, the 
unions, into decline. Institutionalized coercion of the kind that played a 
crucial role in twentieth-century society will no longer be possible. Technol- 
ogy is precipitating a profound change in the logic of extortion and protec- 
tion. 


“... there be no Propriety, no Dominion, no Mine and Thine distinct; but only 
that to be every man’s that he can get; and for so long, as he can keep it.”’? 


—THOMAS HOBBES 


he 


Extortion and Protection 


Throughout history, violence has been a dagger pointed at the heart of the 
economy. As Thomas Schelling shrewdly put it, “The power to hurt—to 
destroy things that somebody treasures, to inflict pain and grief—is a kind 
of bargaining power, not easy to use but used often. In the underworld it is 
the basis for blackmail, extortion, and kidnapping, in the commercial world, 
for boycotts, strikes, and lockouts....It is often the basis for discipline, 
civilian and military; and gods use it to exact discipline.” * A government’s 
capacity to tax ultimately depends upon the same vulnerabilities as do pri- 
vate shakedowns and extortion. Although we tend not to perceive it in these 
terms, the proportion of assets that are controlled and spent coercively, 
through crime and government, provides a rough measure of the megapoliti- 
cal balance between extortion and protection. If technology made the protec- 
tion of assets difficult, crime would tend to be widespread, and so would 
union activity. Under such circumstances, protection by government would 
therefore command a premium. Taxes would be high. Where taxes are lower 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 155 


and wage rates in the workplace are determined by market forces rather than 
through political intervention or coercion, technology has tipped the balance 
toward protection. 

The technological imbalance between extortion and protection reached an 
extreme at the end of the third quarter of the twentieth century. In some 
advanced Western societies more than a majority of resources were comman- 
deered by governments. The incomes of a large fraction of the population 
were either set by fiat or determined under the influence of coercion, such 
as by strikes and threats of violence in other forms. The welfare state and 
the trade union were both artifacts of technology, sharing the spoils of the tri- 
umph of power over efficiency in the twentieth century. They could not have 
existed if not for the technologies, military and civilian, that raised the 
returns to violence during the Industrial Age. 

The capacity to create assets has always entailed some vulnerability to 
extortion. The greater the assets created or possessed, the higher the price to 


be paid, in one way or another. Either you paid off everyone who gained the 


leverage to employ violence for extortion, or you paid for military power 
capable of defeating any shakedown attempt by brute force. 


“Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within 
thy borders . . .” 


——ISAIAH 60:18 


The Mathematics of Protection 


Now the dagger of violence could soon be blunted. Information technology 
promises to alter dramatically the balance between protection and extortion, 
making protection of assets in many cases much easier, and extortion more 
difficult. The technology of the Information Age makes it possible to create 
assets that are outside the reach of many forms of coercion. This new 
asymmetry between protection and extortion rests upon a fundamental truth 
of mathematics. It is easier to multiply than to divide. As basic as this truth 
is, however, its far-reaching consequences were disguised prior to the advent 
of microprocessors. High-speed computers have facilitated many billions of 
times more computations in the past decade than were undertaken in all the 
previous history of the world. This leap in computation has allowed us for 
the first time to fathom some of the universal characteristics of complexity. 
What the computers show is that complex systems can be built and under- 
stood only from the bottom up. Multiplying prime numbers is simple. But 
disaggregating complexity by trying to decompose the product of large 


156 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


prime numbers is all but impossible. Kevin Kelly, editor of Wired, puts it 
this way: “To multiply several prime numbers into a larger product is easy; 
any elementary school kid can do it. But the world’s supercomputers choke 
while trying to unravel a product into its simple primes.” 4 


The Logic of Complex Systems 


The cybereconomy will inevitably be shaped by this profound mathematical 
truth. It already has an obvious expression in powerful encryption algo- 
rithms. As we explore later in this chapter, these algorithms will allow the 
creation of a new, protected realm of cybercommerce in which the leverage 
of violence will be greatly reduced. The balance between extortion and 
protection will tip dramatically in the direction of protection. This will facil- 
itate the emergence of an economy that depends more upon spontaneous 
adaptive mechanisms and less upon conscious decision-making and resource 
allocation through bureaucracy. The new system in which protection will 
be at the forefront will be very different from that which arose from the 
predominance of compulsion in the industrial period. 


Command-and-Control Systems Are Primitive 


We wrote in The Great Reckoning that the computer is enabling us to “see” 
the formerly invisible complexity inherent in a whole range of systems.* 
Not only does advanced computational capability enable us to better under- 
stand the dynamics of complex systems; it also enables us to harness those 
complexities in productive ways. In a sense, this is not even a choice but an 
inevitability if the economy is to advance beyond ,the inflexible central- 
control stage of development. Such a system, which depends upon linear 
relationships, is fundamentally primitive. Government appropriation inevita- 
bly dragoons resources from high-value complex uses to low-value primitive 
uses. It is a process that is limited by the same mathematical asymmetry that 
prevents the unraveling of the product of large prime numbers. Dividing the 
spoils can never be anything but primitive. 


Everything Gets More Complex 


Everywhere you look in the universe, you see systems attaining greater 
complexity as they evolve. This is true in astrophysics. It is true in a puddle. 
Leave rainwater alone in a low spot and it will grow more complex. Ad- 


* See Chapter 8 of The Great Reckoning, “Linear Expectations in a Nonlinear World: How 
the Telescope Led Us to Compute; How the Computer Can Help Us to See.” 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 157 


vanced systems of every variety are complex adaptive systems without an 
authority in charge. Every complex system in nature, of which the market 
economy is the most evident social manifestation, depends upon dispersed 
capabilities. Systems that work most effectively under the widest range of 
conditions depend for their resilience upon spontaneous order that accom- 
modates novel possibilities. Life itself is such a complex system. Billions of 
potential combinations of genes produce a single human individual. Sorting 
among them would confound any bureaucracy. 

Twenty-five years ago, that could only have been an intuition. Today it is 
demonstrable. The closer computers bring us to understanding the mathe- 
matics of artificial life, the better we understand the mathematics of real 
life, which are those of biological complexity. These secrets of complexity, 
harnessed through information technology, are allowing economies to be 
reconfigured into more complex forms. The Internet and the World Wide 
Web have already taken on characteristics of an organic system, as Kevin 
Kelly suggests in Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social 
Systems, and the Economic World.* In his words, nature is “an idea factory. 
Vital, postindustrial paradigms are hidden in every jungly ant hill... . The 
wholesale transfer of bio-logic into machines should fill us with awe. When 
the union of the born and the made is complete, our fabrications will learn, 
adapt, heal themselves, and evolve. This is a power we have hardly dreamt 
Giiyet;* 

Indeed, the consequences of the “wholesale transfer of bio-logic into 
machines” are bound to be far-reaching. There has always been a strong 
tendency for social systems to mimic the characteristics of prevailing tech- 
nology. This is something that Marx got right. Gigantic factories coincided 
with the age of big government. Microprocessing is miniaturizing institu- 
tions. If our analysis is correct, the technology of the Information Age will 
ultimately create an economy better suited to exploit the advantages of 
complexity. 

Yet the megapolitical dimensions of such a change are so little understood 
that even most of those who have recognized its mathematical importance 
have done so in an anachronistic way. It is simply difficult to grasp and 
internalize fully the likelihood that technological change in the next few 
years will antiquate most of the political forms and concepts of the modern 
world. For example, the late physicist Heinz Pagels wrote in his farseeing 
book, The Dreams of Reason, “1 am convinced that the nations and people 
who master the new science of Complexity will become the economic, 
cultural, and political superpowers of the next century.” ’ It is an impressive 
forecast. But we believe it is bound to be wrong, not because it is misper- 
ceived, but precisely because it will prove more right than Dr. Pagels dared 
to express. Societies that reconfigure themselves to become more complex 


158 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


adaptive systems will indeed prosper. But when they do, they are unlikely to 
be nations, much less “political superpowers.” The more likely immediate 
beneficiaries of increased complexity of social systems will be the Sovereign 
Individuals of the new millennium. 

As Pagels’s forecast stands, it is the equivalent to a shaman of a hunting 
band of five hundred generations ago telling his men as they crouched 
around the campfire, “I am convinced that the first hunting band to master 
the new science of irrigated planting will have more free time for storytelling 
than even those guys over at the lake who catch the big fish.” As right as he 
was about the importance of complexity, Pagels overlooked the most basic 
fact of all. When the logic of violence changes, society changes. 


THE LOGIC OF VIOLENCE 


To see how and why, it is necessary to focus on several facets of megapoli- 
tics that are seldom brought to your attention. These are issues that were 
explored by historian Frederic C. Lane, whose work on violence and the 
economic meaning of war is discussed elsewhere in this volume. When Lane 
wrote in the middle of this century, the Information Society was nowhere in 
sight. Under the circumstances, he may well have supposed that the competi- 
tion to employ violence in the world had reached its final stage with the 
appearance of the nation-state. There is no hint in his works that he antici- 
pated microprocessing or believed that it was technologically feasible to 
create assets in cyberspace, a realm without physical existence. Lane had 
nothing to say about the implications of the possibility that large amounts of 
commerce could be made all but immune from the leverage of violence. 

While Lane did not foresee the technological revolutions now unfolding, 
his insights into the various stages of the monopolization of violence in 
the past were so lucid that they have obvious application to the emerging 
Information Revolution. Lane’s study of the violent medieval world attracted 
his attention to issues that conventional economists and historians have 
tended to neglect. He saw that how violence is organized and controlled 
plays a large role in determining “what uses are made of scarce resources.” ® 
Lane also recognized that while production of violence is not usually con- 
sidered part of economic output, the control of violence is crucial to the 
economy. The primary role of government is to provide protection against 
violence. As he put it, 


Every economic enterprise needs and pays for protection, protection against 
the destruction or armed seizure of its capital and the forceful disruption of its 
labor. In highly organized societies the production of this utility, protection, is 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 159 


one of the functions of a special association or enterprise called government. 
Indeed, one of the most distinctive characteristics of governments is their 
attempt to create law and order by using force themselves and by controlling 
through various means the use of force by others.” ° 


That is a point that is apparently too basic to appear in textbooks, or to 
form a part of the civic discussion that presumably determines the course of 
politics. But it is also too basic to ignore if you wish to understand the 
unfolding Information Revolution. Protection of life and property is indeed 
a crucial need that has bedeviled every society that ever existed. How to 
fend off violent aggression is history’s central dilemma. It cannot easily be 
solved, notwithstanding the fact that protection can be provided in more than 
one way. 


The Close of an Age 


As we write, the megapolitical consequences of the Information Age are only 
beginning to be felt. The economic change of recent decades has been from 
the primacy of manufactures to that of information and computation, from 
machine power to microprocessing, from factory to workstation, from mass 
production to small teams, or even to persons working alone. As the scale 
of enterprise falls, so does the potential for sabotage and blackmail in the 
workplace. Smaller-scale operations are much more difficult to organize by 
unions. 

Microtechnology allows firms to be smaller, more footloose targets. Many 
deal in services or products with negligible natural-resource content. In 
principle, these businesses could be conducted almost anywhere on the 
planet. They are not trapped at a specific location, like a mine or a port. 
Therefore, in the fullness of time, they will be far less susceptible to being 
taxed, either by unions or by politicians. An old Chinese folk wisdom holds, 
“Of all the thirty-six ways to get out of trouble, the best way is—leave.” !° 

In the Information Age, that Oriental wisdom will be easily applied. If 
operations become uncomfortable due to excessive demands in one location, 
it will be far easier to move. Indeed, as we explore below, it will be possible 
in the Information Age to create virtual corporations whose domicile in any 
jurisdiction will be entirely contingent on the spot market. An overnight 
increase in the degree of attempted extortion, either by governments or 
others, could lead to the activities and assets of the virtual corporation 
fleeing the jurisdiction at the speed of light. 

The growing integration of microtechnology into industrial processes 
means that even those firms that still deal in manufactured products with 
great economies of scale are no longer as vulnerable to the leverage of 


160 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


violence as they once were. An example illustrating this point is the collapse 
of the United Auto Workers union’s lengthy strike against Caterpillar, which 
was called off in the waning days of 1995 after almost two years. Unlike 
the assembly lines of the 1930s, today’s Caterpillar plant employs far more 
skilled workers. Pressed by foreign competition, Caterpillar farmed out 
much of its low-skill work, closed inefficient plants, and spent almost $2 
billion computerizing machine tools and installing assembly robots. Even 
the strike itself helped spur labor-saving efficiencies. The company now 
claims to need two thousand fewer employees than when the walkout 
began."! 

The megapolitics of the production process has altered more drastically 
than most people realize. This change is not yet clearly visible, partly be- 
cause there is always a lag between a revolution in megapolitical conditions 
and the institutional changes it inevitably precipitates. Further, the rapid 
evolution of microprocessing technology means that products are now on 
the horizon whose megapolitical consequences can be anticipated even be- 
fore they exist. They will make for a far different world. 


EXPLOITATION OF THE CAPITALISTS BY THE WORKERS 


The character of technology through most of the twentieth century made the 
forcible seizure of a factory, or a sit-down strike, a hard tactic for owners or 
managers to counter. As historian Robert S. McElvaine put it, a sit-down 
strike “made it difficult for employers to break the strike without doing the 
same to their own equipment.” !? In effect, the workers physically held the 
owners’ capital to ransom. For reasons we explore below, larger industrial 
companies proved easier targets for unions to exploit than smaller firms. In 
1937, General Motors was perhaps the leading industrial corporation in the 
world. Its factories were among the largest and most costly aggregations of 
machinery ever assembled, employing many thousands of workers. Every 
hour, every day that the GM plants were forced to sit idle cost the company 
a small fortune. A strike that remained unsettled for weeks, like that in the 
winter of 1936-37, meant rapidly ballooning losses. 


Defying Supply and Demand 


Unable to produce automobiles after the seizure of its third plant, GM soon 
capitulated to the union. This was hardly an economic decision based upon 
the supply and demand for labor. Far from it. When General Motors acceded 
to the union demands there were nine million persons unemployed in the 
United States, 14 percent of the workforce. Most of those without work 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 161 


would gladly have taken jobs at GM. They certainly had the skills to fill 
assembly-line jobs, although you might not know this from most contempo- 
rary accounts. A delicate etiquette shrouded straightforward analysis of labor 
relations during the industrial period. One of its pretenses was the idea that 
factory jobs, particularly in the middle of the twentieth century, were skilled 
work. This was untrue. Most factory jobs could have been performed by 
almost anyone capable of showing up on time. They required little or no 
training, not even the ability to read or write. As recently as the 1980s, large 
fractions of the General Motors workforce were either illiterate, innumerate, 
or both. Until the 1990s, the typical assembly-line worker at GM received 
only one day of orientation before taking his place on the assembly line. A 
job you can learn in a single day is not skilled work. 

Yet in 1937, with unskilled and skilled workers alike lined up begging for 
jobs, GM factory workers were able to coerce their employers into a pay 
hike. Their success had much more to do with the dynamics of violence than 
with the supply and demand for labor. In March 1937, the month following 
the settlement of the GM confrontation, there were 170 more sit-down strikes 
in the United States. Most were successful. Similar episodes occurred in 
every industrialized country. The workers simply seized the factories and 
ransomed them back to the owners. It was a tactic of great simplicity, and 
one that in most cases was profitable and fun for those participating. One 
sit-down striker wrote, “I am having a great time, something new, something 
different, lots of grub and music.” 

The GM sit-down strike of 1936-37 and the other forcible plant seizures 
of the time were examples of a phenomenon we described in Blood in the 
Streets as “the exploitation of the capitalists by the workers.” This was not 
the view that Pete Seeger set to music in his sad songs. But unless you are 
planning a career as a folk singer in a blue-collar neighborhood the im- 
portant thing to focus on is not the popular interpretation but the underlying 
reality. Wherever you look in history there is generally a layer of rationaliza- 
tion and make-believe that disguises the true megapolitical foundations of 
any systematic extortion. If you take the rationalizations at face value, you 
are unlikely to grasp what is really going on. 


DECIPHERING THE LOGIC OF EXTORTION 


To recognize the megapolitical implications of the current shift to the Infor- 
mation Age, you have to strip away the cant and focus on the real logic of 
violence in society. This is like stripping away the layers of an overripe 
onion. It may bring tears to your eyes, but don’t look away. We first examine 
the logic of extortion in the workplace, then extend the analysis to broader 


162 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


issues involving the creation and protection of assets, and the nature of 
modern government. To a greater degree than most people imagine, the 
prosperity of government, like that of unions, was directly correlated to the 
leverage available for extortion. That leverage was much lower in the nine- 
teenth century than in the twentieth. In the next millennium, it will fall 
almost to the vanishing point. 

The whole logic of government and the character of power have been 
transformed by microprocessing. This may seem exaggerated when you first 
think about it. But look closely. The prosperity of governments has gone 
hand in hand with the prosperity of labor unions in the twentieth century. 
Before this century, most governments commandeered far fewer resources 
than the militant welfare states to which we have become accustomed. Like- 
wise, unions were small or insignificant factors in economic life prior to 
this century. The ability of workers to coerce their employers into paying 
above-market wages depended upon the same megapolitical conditions that 
allowed governments to extract 40 percent or more of the economy’s output 
in taxes. 


Workplace Extortion Before the Twentieth Century 


The rise and fall of union extortion of the capitalists can be readily explained 
by the changing megapolitics of the production process. In 1776, when 
Adam Smith published The Wealth of Nations, conditions for extortion in 
the workplace were sufficiently unfavorable that “combinations” by work- 
men “to raise the price of their labour” were seldom tenable. Most manufac- 
turing firms were tiny and family-run. Larger-scale industrial activities were 
just beginning to emerge. This did not rule out opportunities for violence, 
but it gave them little leverage. Indeed, during Smith:s time and well into the 
nineteenth century, unions were generally considered illegal combinations in 
the Great Britain, the United States, and other common-law countries. Adam 
Smith described attempted strikes in these terms: “Their usual pretences are 
sometimes the high price of provisions; sometimes the great profit which 
their master make by their work....[T]hey have always recourse to the 
loudest clamour, and sometimes to the most shocking violence and out- 
rage.” '4 Nonetheless, the workmen “very seldom derive any advantage of 
those tumultuous combinations,” except “the punishment or ruin of the 
ringleaders.” !5 

Scale economies in industry and firm size grew during the nineteenth 
century. Yet most individuals continued to work for themselves as farmers 
or small proprietors, and union organizing efforts, like those described by 
Adam Smith, continued to “generally end in nothing.” '® The legal and 
political standing of unions changed only as the scale of enterprise rose. The 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 163 


first unions that succeeded in organizing were craft unions of highly skilled 
workers, who normally organized without extensive violence. They tended 
to settle for wage increases that matched the marginal costs of replacing 
them. Unions for unskilled workers were another story. They tended to 
exploit the shift to firms of larger scale by singling out for organizing efforts 
precisely those industries that were especially vulnerable to coercion, either 
because they operated at a larger scale or the character of the operations 
exposed their owners to physical sabotage. This pattern was borne out from 
Newcastle to Argentina.!” 

An early example of violent labor movements in the United States was an 
attack on the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal in 1834. Unlike most early- 
nineteenth-century businesses, the C&O Canal was not a contained and 
easily protected operation. As originally planned, it was to have stretched 
342 miles, with a 3,000-foot rise from the lower Potomac to the upper 
Ohio.'® Digging such a ditch was a big job that never quite got completed. 
Nonetheless, a large number of workers were employed trying to do it, 
some of whom were not long in recognizing that the canal could be easily 
incapacitated. Indeed, without regular maintenance, it could be sabotaged by 
muskrats burrowing under the towpath. In operation, the canal’s locks and 
channels could be ruined simply by careless use, floods from heavy rains, or 
battering by untowed boats. It was a simple matter for strikers to blockade 
the waterway with sunken boats or other debris. In early 1834, rioting among 
rival gangs of Irish workers on the C&O led to an attempt to make good this 
potential and seize the canal. The effort failed, however, leaving five persons 
dead, after President Andrew Jackson sent federal troops from Ft. McHenry 
to disperse the workers. 

Mines and railroads also offered early targets of choice for union activism 
in America. Like the C&O Canal, they, too, were highly vulnerable to 
sabotage. Mines, for example, could be flooded, or blockaded at the entrance. 
Simply killing the mules that towed the ore cars out of underground mines 
created a difficult and unpleasant situation for the owners. Likewise, railroad 
trackbeds stretched over many miles, and could be guarded only with diffi- 
culty. It was relatively easy for union thugs to attack mines and railroads and 
do substantial economic damage. Such attacks became commonplace during 
attempts to organize effective unions. These efforts were generally most 
intense during periods when real wages were rising due to deflation. When 
Owners attempted to adjust nominal wages, this often triggered protests 
leading to violence. Such incidents were widespread in the depression that 
followed the Panic of 1873. 

In December 1874, open warfare erupted in the anthracite coalfields of 
eastern Pennsylvania. The unions organized a violent strike force in the 
guise of a secret society named the Ancient Order of Hibernians. Also 


164 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


known as the “Molly Maguires,” after an Irish revolutionary, this group was 
known for “terrorizing the coal fields and preventing those miners who 
wished to work from doing so. Sabotage and destruction of property, outright 
murder and assassination, were all charged against its members.” !° 

There was also recurring violence among railroad employees. For exam- 
ple, there were serious outbreaks in July 1877 aimed at destroying the 
property of both the Pennsylvania and Baltimore & Ohio railroads. Workers 
took over switches, tore up tracks, sealed off caryards, disabled locomotives, 
sabotaged, then looted trains, and worse. In Pittsburgh, roundhouses of the 
Pennsylvania Railroad were set ablaze with hundreds of people inside. Doz- 
ens were killed, two thousand railcars were burned and looted and the ma- 
chine shop was destroyed, along with a grain elevator and 125 locomotives. 
Federal troops intervened to restore order.*° 

Although these early strikes were interpreted sympathetically by socialist 
and union activists, they inspired little public support. Notwithstanding the 
inherent vulnerability of industries such as mines and railroads, overall 
megapolitical conditions were not yet favorable to the exploitation of the 
capitalists by the workers. The scale of enterprise was too small to facilitate 
systematic extortion. While there were vulnerable industries, they employed 
too small a fraction of the population to allow the benefits of the coercion 
against employers to be broadly shared. Without such support, they were 
unsustainable because owners could depend upon the government for protec- 
tion. While unions sometimes attempted through intimidation to prevent 
local officials from enforcing injunctions, these efforts, too, were seldom 
successful. Even the most violent strikes were usually suppressed within 
days or weeks by military means. 


Blackmail Made Easy : 


There is a lesson to be learned for the Information Age in the fact that 
union attempts to achieve wages above market-clearing levels were seldom 
successful when firm size was small. Not even those lines of business that 
were Clearly vulnerable to sabotage, such as canals, railways, streetcars, and 
mines, were easily brought under control. This is not because the unions 
shrank from using violence. To the contrary. Violence was lavishly em- 
ployed, sometimes against high-profile individuals. For example, in a case 
celebrated in the American labor movement as a case of “miners’ ven- 
geance,” Governor Frank Steunenberg of Idaho, who had opposed an attempt 
by miners to blockade properties at Coeur d’ Alene, was assassinated by a 
bomb tossed by a contract killer hired by the union.”! But even murder and 
threats of murder were usually insufficient to obtain union recognition prior 
to the emergence of large-scale factories and mass-production enterprises in 
the twentieth century. 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 165 


To understand why the circumstances of unions underwent such a change 
in the twentieth century, you must look at the characteristics of production 
technology. Something definitely changed with the rapid rise of blue-collar 
factory employment in the early decades of the twentieth century. This 
change made businesses at the forefront of the economy especially vulnera- 
ble to extortion. In fact, the physical characteristics of industrial technology 
almost invited workers to employ coercion to shake down the capitalists. 
Consider: 

1. There was a high natural-resource content in most industrial products. 
This tended to anchor production to a limited number of locations, almost 
in the way that mines must be located where the ore bodies are. Factories 
placed near transportation centers with convenient access to parts suppliers 
and raw materials had significant operating advantages. This made it easier 
for coercive organizations, like governments and unions, to extract some of 
those advantages for themselves. 

2. Rising economies of scale led to very large enterprises. Early- 
nineteenth-century factories had been relatively small. But as scale econo- 
mies increased with the assembly line during the twentieth century, the size 
and cost of facilities at the forefront of the production process rose rapidly. 
This made them easier targets in several ways. For example, significant scale 
economies tend to go hand in hand with long product cycles. Long product 
cycles make for more stable markets. This, in turn, invites predatory tar- 
geting of firms because it implies that there are longer-term benefits to 
capture. 

3. The number of competitors in leading industries fell sharply. It was 
not uncommon during the industrial period to find only a handful of firms 
competing for billion-dollar markets. This contributed to making these firms 
targets for union extortion. It is far simpler to attack five firms than five 
thousand. The very concentration of industry was itself a factor that facili- 
tated extortion. This advantage was self-reinforcing because the firms co- 
erced into paying monopoly wages were unlikely to face stiff competition 
from others who were not also burdened by above-market labor costs. 
Unions could therefore drain a considerable portion of the profits of such 
firms without exposing them to immediate bankruptcy. Obviously, if employ- 
ers had routinely gone broke whenever they were forced to pay above-market 
wages, workers would have gained little by coercing them to do so. 

4. The capital requirements for fixed investment rose to match the scale 
of enterprise. This not only increased the vulnerability of capital and magni- 
fied the costs of plant closures; it also made it increasingly unlikely that a 
modern factory could be owned by a single individual or family, except 
through inheritance from someone who had launched the business at a 
smaller scale. In order to fund the massive costs of tooling and operating a 
large factory, the wealth of hundreds or thousands of people had to be pooled 


166 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


together in capital markets. This tended to make it more difficult for the 
splintered and almost anonymous owners to defend their property. They had 
little choice but to rely upon professional managers who seldom held more 
than a bare chemical trace of the outstanding shares of the company. Reli- 
ance on subordinate managers weakened the resistance of firms to extortion. 
The managers lacked strong incentives to risk life and limb protecting the 
property of the firm. Their efforts seldom matched the kind of militancy 
commonly seen among owners of liquor stores and other small businesses 
when their property comes under threat. 

5. Greater firm size also meant that more of the total workforce was 
employed in fewer firms than at any time in the past. In some cases, tens of 
thousands of workers found employment in a single company. In military 
terms, the owners and managers were starkly outnumbered by persons em- 
ployed in subordinate positions. Ratios of thirty to one or worse were com- 
mon. This disadvantage rose with firm size because massive numbers of 
workers assembled together could more easily employ violence in an anony- 
mous way. Under such conditions, the workers were unlikely to have had 
any meaningful contact or relationships with the owners of the factory. The 
anonymous character of these relationships no doubt made it easier for 
workers to dismiss the importance of the owners’ property rights. 

6. Massed employment in a small number of firms was a broad social 
phenomenon. This further enhanced the megapolitical advantages enjoyed 
by unions as compared to the nineteenth century in America, when most 
people were self-employed or working in small firms. In 1940, 60 percent of 
the American workforce had blue-collar jobs.?? As a consequence, support 
for the use of extortion to raise wages spread among a large number who 
imagined they might benefit by it. This was illustrated by a 1938-39 study 
of the views of 1,700 people in Akron, Ohio, toward corporate property. The 
survey found that 68 percent of the CIO Rubber Workers had very little or 
no sympathy with the concept of corporate property, “while only one percent 
were found in the classification of strong support of corporate property 
rights.” 2? On the other hand, not a single businessman, even a small propri- 
etor, fell into the same category of “strong opposition to corporate property; 
94 percent received ratings in the range of extremely high support for the 
rights of property.” 24 

7. Assembly-line technology was inherently sequential. The fact that the 
whole production process depended upon the movement and assembly of 
parts in a fixed sequence created additional vulnerabilities to disruption. In 
effect, the assembly line was like a railroad within factory walls. If the track 
could be blocked, or the availability of a single part could be cut off, the 
whole production process was brought to a halt. 

8. Assembly-line technology standardized work. This reduced the vari- 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 167 


ability of output for persons of different skills working with the same tools. 
In fact, a crucial objective of factory design was to create a system in which 
a genius and a moron on successive shifts of the assembly line would 
produce the same product. What might be called “stupid” machines were 
designed to be capable of only one kind of output. This made it unnecessary 
for even the buyer of a Cadillac to inquire about the identity of the line 
workers who produced his vehicle. All the products were meant to be alike, 
whatever the differences in skills and intelligence between the workers who 
produced them. 

The fact that unskilled workers on the assembly line could produce the 
same product as more able individuals contributed to the egalitarian agenda 
by making it appear that everyone’s economic contributions were equal. 
Entrepreneurial skills and mental effort seemed less important. The magic 
of modern production appeared to lie in the machines themselves. If they 
could not actually have been designed by everyone, they nevertheless ap- 
peared to be intellectually accessible to almost everyone. This gave more 
plausibility to the fiction that unskilled labor was being “exploited” by 
factory owners who could be cut out of the equation with no loss to anyone 
but themselves. “We learned we can take the plant,” as one GM striker put 
it. “We already knew how to run them. If General Motors isn’t careful we'll 
put two and two together.” 7° 

These characteristics of industrial technology led uniformly to the creation 
of labor unions to exploit the vulnerability to shakedowns, and to larger 
governments that fattened on the high taxes that could be imposed upon 
large-scale industrial facilities. This did not happen once or twice, it hap- 
pened everywhere large-scale industry took root. Time after time, unions 
emerged to employ violence to achieve wages considerably above market 
levels. They were able to do this because industrial factories tended to be 
expensive, conspicuous, immobile, and costly. They could scarcely be hid- 
den. They could not be moved. Every moment they were out of service 
meant that their staggering costs were not being amortized. 

All this made them sitting ducks for coercive shakedowns, a fact that is 
far more obvious in the history of labor unions than the prevailing ideology 
of the twentieth century would have you believe. The noted economist Henry 
Simons framed the issue in 1944: 


Labor organization without large powers of coercion and intimidation is an 
unreal abstraction. Unions now have such powers; they always have had and 
always will have, so long as they persist in the present form. Where the power 
is small or insecurely possessed, it must be exercised overtly and extensively; 
large and unchallenged, it becomes like the power of government, confidently 
held, respectfully regarded, and rarely displayed conspicuously.” ”° 


168 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


As precise as Simons’s analysis is, however, he was wrong about a crucial 
point. He presumed that unions “always will have” what he described as 
“large powers of coercion and intimidation.” In fact, unions are fading away, 
not merely in the United States and Great Britain, but in other mature 
industrial societies. The reason they are fading, what Simons missed and 
what even many union organizers fail to understand, is that the shift to an 
Information Society has altered megapolitical conditions in crucial ways that 
sharply increase the security of property. Microtechnology has already begun 
to prove subversive of the extortion that supports the welfare state because 
even in the commercial realm it creates very different incentives from those 
of the industrial period. 

1. Information technology has negligible natural-resource content. It con- 
fers few if any inherent advantages of location. Most information technology 
is highly portable. Because it can function independent of place, information 
technology increases the mobility of ideas, persons, and capital. General 
Motors could not pack up its three assembly lines in Flint, Michigan, and fly 
away. A software company can. The owners can download their algorithms 
into portable computers and take the next plane out. Such firms also have an 
added inducement to escape high taxes or union demands for monopoly 
wages. Smaller firms tend to have more competitors. If you have dozens or 
even hundreds of competitors tempting your customers, you cannot afford 
to pay politicians or your employees much more than they are actually worth. 
If you alone tried to do so, your costs would be higher than your competitors 
and you would go broke. The absence of significant operating advantages in 
a given locale means that coercive organizations, like governments and 
unions, will inevitably have less leverage to exploit in trying to extract some 
of those advantages for themselves. 

2. Information technology lowers the scale of enterprise. This makes for 
smaller firm size, which implies a larger number of competitors. Increased 
competition reduces the potential for extortion by raising the number of 
targets that must be physically controlled in order to raise wages or tax rates 
above competitive levels. The sharp fall in the average size of firms facili- 
tated by information technology has already reduced the number of persons 
employed in subordinate positions. In the United States, for example, widely 
reported estimates suggest that as many as 30 million persons worked alone 
in their own firms in 1996. Obviously, these 30 million are unlikely to go on 
strike against themselves. It is only slightly less plausible that the additional 
millions who work in small firms with a handful of employees would attempt 
to coerce their employers into paying above-market wages. 

In the Information Age, workers who wish to raise their wages through 
extortion will lack the military advantage of overwhelming numbers that 
made them more formidable within the factory. The fewer persons employed 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 169 


in any firm, the fewer the opportunities for anonymous violence. For this 
reason alone, ten thousand workers divided among five hundred firms would 
pose a lesser threat to the property of those firms than ten thousand workers 
in a single firm, even if the ratio of workers to owners/managers were exactly 
the same. 

3. Falling scale in enterprise also implies that efforts to secure above- 
market wages are less likely to command broad social support, as they did 
in the industrial period. Unions seeking to shake down employers are much 
more likely to find themselves in the situation of the canal workers, railroad 
employees, and miners of the nineteenth century. Even where a few firms 
with large-scale economies remain as holdovers from the Industrial Age, 
they will do so in a context of widely dispersed employment in small firms. 
The preponderance of small firms and smallholders suggests greater social 
support for property rights even if the desire to redistribute income remains 
unaltered. 

4. Information technology lowers capital costs, which also tends to in- 
crease competition by facilitating entrepreneurship and allowing more peo- 
ple to work independently. Lower capital requirements not only reduce 
barriers to entry; they also reduce “barriers to exit.” In other words, they 
imply that firms are likely to have fewer assets relative to income, and 
therefore less ability to sustain losses. Not only will they tend to have less 
recourse to banks for borrowing; firms in the Information Age are also likely 
to have fewer physical assets to capture. 

5. Information technology shortens the product cycle. This makes for 
more rapid product obsolescence. This, too, tends to make any gains that 
might be achieved by extorting above-market wages short-lived. In highly 
competitive markets, wages that are too high may lead directly to a rapid 
loss of jobs and even bankruptcy for the firm. Grasping for temporarily 
higher wages at the expense of placing your job in jeopardy is like burning 
your furniture to make the house a few degrees warmer. 

6. Information technology is not sequential but simultaneous and dis- 
persed. Unlike the assembly line, information technology can accommodate 
multiple processes at the same time. It disperses activities on networks, 
allowing for redundancy and substitution between workstations that could 
number in the thousands or even the millions and be anywhere on earth. In 
increasing numbers of activities, it is possible for people to cooperate with- 
out ever coming into physical contact with one another. As virtual reality 
and video conferencing become more advanced, the trend toward dispersal 
of functions and telecommuting will accelerate. This is the Information Age 
equivalent of “putting out,’ which broke the power of the medieval guilds. 

The fact that fewer and fewer people will be working together in smoky 
factories not only takes away an important advantage that workers formerly 


170 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


enjoyed in engineering shakedowns of capitalists; it also makes it increas- 
ingly difficult even to distinguish from racketeering the type of extortion 
that has been acceptable in the workplace. Heretofore, only persons who 
have worked together and been employed by a firm in a common setting 
have been permitted to use violence in the attempt to raise their incomes. 
But if the “workplace” does not exist as a central location, and most of the 
functions are dispersed to subcontractors and telecommuters, there is very 
little to distinguish from a shakedown racket their efforts to extort money 
from their clients or “employers.” 

For example, is a telecommuter who demands extra cash under threat of 
infecting the company’s computers with a virus a worker on strike? Or an 
Internet racketeer? 

Whether he is one or the other will prove to be a distinction without a 
difference. The reaction of the targeted firms is likely to be much the same 
in any event. Technical solutions to information sabotage, like improved 
encryption and network security, that would answer the danger of an outside 
hacker should also render moot the capacity of the disgruntled employee 
or subcontractor to impose damage on parties with whom he regularly or 
sporadically deals. 

Of course, it might be suggested that the worker or telecommuter could 
always report to the office and carry on a more traditional strike there. But 
even this may not be as simple as it would seem in the Information Age. 
The capacity of information technology to transcend locality and disperse 
economic functions means that for the first time employees and employers 
need not even reside in the same jurisdictions. Here, we are not talking about 
the difference between being in the boroughs of Mayfair and Peckham, but 
of employers in Bermuda and telecommuters in New Delhi. 

Furthermore, if the Indians became infatuated by accounts of the great 
GM strikes of 1936-37 and determined to journey to Bermuda to picket, 
they might find no physical office at all when they arrived. Chiat/Day, a large 
advertising company, has already set about dismantling its headquarters. Its 
employees, or subcontractors, stay in touch through call-forwarding and the 
Internet. When it becomes necessary to assemble talent teams to coordinate 
work on account projects, they rent hotel meeting rooms. When the project 
is over they check out. 

The fact that microprocessing helps to liberate and disperse the production 
process from the fixed sequence of the assembly line greatly reduces the 
leverage formerly enjoyed by coercive institutions like unions and govern- 
ments. If the assembly line were like a railroad within factory walls that 
could easily be captured by a sit-down strike, cyberspace is an unbounded 
realm without physical existence. It cannot be occupied by force or held to 
ransom. The position of employees wishing to use violence as leverage to 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 171 


extract higher incomes will be far weaker in the Information Age than it was 
for the sit-down strikers at General Motors in 1936-37. 

7. Microprocessing individualizes work. Industrial technology standard- 
ized work. Anyone using the same tools would produce the same output. 
Microtechnology has started replacing “stupid” machines with more intelli- 
gent technology capable of highly variable output. The increased variability 
of output for persons using the same tools has profound implications, many 
of which we explore in coming chapters. Among the more important is the 
fact that where output varies, incomes vary as well. Most of the value in 
fields where skill varies will tend to be created by a small number of persons. 
This is a common characteristic of the most highly competitive markets. It 
is quite evident, for example, in sports. Many millions of young people 
worldwide play various versions of football. But 99 percent of the money 
that is spent to watch football games is paid to see the performances of a 
tiny fraction of the total number of players. Likewise, the world is full of 
aspiring actors and actresses. Yet only a relatively small number become 
stars. Equally, tens of thousands of books are published annually. But most 
of the royalty money is paid to a small number of best-selling authors who 
can really entertain their readers. Unhappily, we are not among them. 

The vast variability of output among persons employing the same equip- 
ment poses yet another obstacle to extortion. It creates a major bargaining 
problem about how to share the payoff. Where a relatively small proportion 
of those participating in a given activity create most of the value, it is all but 
mathematically impossible for them to be left better off by a coerced out- 
come that averages incomes. One software programmer may devise an algo- 
rithm for controlling a robot that proves to be worth millions. Another, 
working with identical equipment, may write a program worth nothing. The 
more productive programmer is no more likely to wish to have his income 
tied to that of his compatriot than Tom Clancy is to agree to average his 
book royalties with ours. 

Even the early stages of the Information Revolution have made it far more 
obvious than it was in 1975 that skills and mental ability are crucial variables 
in economic output. This has already vaporized the once-proud rationaliza- 
tion for extortion of the capitalists by the workers that prevailed during the 
industrial period. The fantasy that unskilled labor actually created the value 
that seemed to be pocketed in a disproportionate share by the capitalists and 
entrepreneurs is already an anachronism. It is not even a plausible fiction in 
the case of information technology. When the programmer sits down to write 
code, there is too direct a line of attribution between his skill and his product 
to allow for much mistake about who is responsible. It is obvious beyond 
dispute that an illiterate or semi-literate could not program a computer. It is 
therefore equally obvious that any value in programs compiled by others 


172 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


could not have been stolen from him. This is why cries of “exploitation” by 
workers are now heard mainly among janitors. 

Information technology is making it plain that the problem faced by 
persons of low skill is not that their productive capacities are being unfairly 
taken advantage of, but rather the fear that they may lack the ability to make 
a real economic contribution. As Kevin Kelly suggests in Out of Control, 
the “Upstart” car company of the Information Age may be the brainchild of 
“a dozen people,” who will outsource most of their parts, and still produce 
cars more carefully customized and tailored to their buyer’s wishes than 
anything yet seen from Detroit or Tokyo: “Cars, each one customer-tailored, 
are ordered by a network of customers and shipped the minute they are done. 
Molds for the car’s body are rapidly shaped by computer-guided lasers, and 
fed designs generated by customer response and target marketing. A flexible 
line of robots assembles the cars. Robot repair and improvement is out- 
sourced to a robot company.” ?’ 


“Tools with a Voice” 


To an increasing extent, unskilled work can be done by automated machines, 
robots, and computational systems, like digital assistants. When Aristotle 
described slaves as “tools with a voice,” he was talking about human beings. 
In the not-distant future, “tools with a voice,” like the genies of fable, 
will be able to speak and follow instructions, and even handle complex 
assignments. Rapidly increasing computational power has already brought 
forth a number of primitive applications of voice recognition, such as hands- 
free telephones and computers that perform mathematical computations fol- 
lowing verbal instructions. Computers that convert speech to text were 
already being marketed in late 1996 as we write. As pattern-recognition 
capabilities improve, computers linked to voice synthesizers will operate 
through networks to perform numerous functions formerly undertaken by 
humans employed as telephone operators, secretaries, travel agents, adminis- 
trative assistants, chess champions, claims processors, composers, bond trad- 
ers, cyberwar specialists, weapons analysts, or even street-smart flirts who 
answer the telephones on 900 calls. 

Michael Mauldin of Carnegie-Mellon University has programmed a 
“bot,” an artificial personality named Julia, who is capable of fooling almost 
anyone with whom she converses on the Internet. According to press reports, 
Julia is a “wise-cracking dame who lives out her life in a role-playing game 
on the Internet. She is smart, funny and loves to flirt. She is also a bit of a 
hockey whiz and able to come up with the perfect sarcastic comment on a 
moment’s notice. Julia, however, is no lady. She is a bot, an artificial intelli- 
gence that exists only in the ether of the Internet.” 2° The startling progress 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 173 


that has already been made in programming artificial intelligence and digital 
servants leaves little doubt that many practical applications are still to come. 
This has significant megapolitical consequences. 


The Individual as an Ensemble 


Development of “tools with a voice” for multiple applications creates the 
possibility for dispersal of the individual into multiple simultaneous activi- 
ties. The individual will no longer be singular, but potentially an ensemble 
of dozens or perhaps even thousands of activities undertaken through intelli- 
gent agents. This will not only greatly enhance the productive capability of 
the most talented individuals; it will also make the Sovereign Individual 
potentially far more formidable militarily than the individual has ever been 
before. 

Not only will one individual be able to manifestly multiply his activities 
by employing an essentially unlimited number of intelligent agents. He or 
she will even be able to act after death. For the first time, an individual will 
be capable of carrying on elaborate tasks even if he is biologically dead. It 
will no longer be possible for either an enemy at war or a criminal to 
completely extinguish the capability of an individual to retaliate by killing 
him. This is one of the more revolutionary innovations in the logic of 
violence in the whole of history. 


Insights for the Information Age 


The biggest changes in life occur to variables that no one watches. Or to put 
it another way, we take for granted variables that have fluctuated very little 
for centuries or even hundreds of generations. For most of history, if not for 
most of human existence, the balance between protection and extortion has 
fluctuated within a narrow margin, with extortion always holding the upper 
hand. Now that is about to change. Information technology is laying the 
groundwork for a fundamental shift in the factors that determine the costs 
and rewards of resorting to violence. The fact that intelligent agents will be 
available to investigate and perhaps retaliate in one fashion or another 
against those who initiate violence is merely a hint of this new vista in 
protection. Twenty-five years ago, the following statement would have been 
no more than the ranting of a crank: “If you kill me, I will sweep the money 
out of your bank accounts and give it to charities in Nepal.” After the turn 
of the millennium, it may not be. Whether it would prove to be a practical 
threat would be determined by factors of time and place. Yet even if the 
would-be miscreant’s accounts proved to be impermeable, there would surely 


174 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


be other costly mischief that an army of intelligent agents could impose in 
retaliation for a crime. Think about it. 


New Alternatives in Protection 


This is only one of many ways to enhance protection that are being opened 
by the technology of the Information Age, most of which tend to undermine 
the near-monopoly on protection and extortion that has been enjoyed by 
governments in the past two centuries. Even without the new technological 
razzle-dazzle, there have always been alternatives for protection, not all of 
which have tended to be monopolized by government. 

A person who feels threatened may simply run away. When the world was 
young and horizons were open, the option to flee was commonly employed. 
When people worry about losses due to theft or vandalism, they may elect 
to purchase insurance policies to indemnify such risks. Curses and spells, 
although weak forms of protection, have also saved lives and warded off acts 
of theft. They sometimes work in societies where predators are superstitious. 
Valuables may also be protected by being hidden. This is sometimes an 
effective method when it can be employed. Assets can be buried. Secured 
with locks. Placed behind high walls. And rigged with sirens and electronic 
monitoring devices. But hiding person and property have not always been 
practical. 

For all the variety of means of protection that have been employed histori- 
cally, one method has dominated all others—the capacity to trump violence 
with violence, to call on greater force to overwhelm anyone who would 
assault you or steal your property. The question is where you can turn for 
such a service, and how you can motivate anyone to risk life and limb to 
help you battle thugs who might initiate force against you. Sometimes close 
relatives have answered the call. Sometimes tribal and clan-based groups 
have served as an unofficial police, responding to violence against any of 
their members with blood vendettas. Sometimes mercenaries or private 
guards have been employed to fend off attack, but not always as usefully as 
you might wish. The new intelligent agents of the Information Age, although 
their activities will be largely confined to cyberspace, add a new alternative. 
Their loyalties, unlike those of the mercenaries, private guards, and even 
remote cousins, will be beyond dispute. 


The Paradoxes of Power 


The use of violence to protect against violence is fraught with paradoxes. 
Under conditions that have heretofore existed, any group or agency that you 
could employ to successfully protect your life and wealth from attack would 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 175 


also necessarily have had the capacity to take either. That is a drawback for 
which there is no easy answer. Normally, you could look to competition to 
keep providers of an economic service from ignoring the wishes of their 
customers. But where violence is concerned, direct competition often has 
perverse results. In the past, it has usually led to increased violence. When 
two would-be protective agencies send their forces to arrest one another, the 
result is more akin to civil war than protection. When you are seeking protec- 
tion from violence you normally do not wish to increase the output of violence 
but to suppress it. And to suppress it on terms that do not allow the plundering 
of the customers who pay for the protection service in the first place. 


“... during the time men live without a common power to keep them all in 
awe, they are in that condition which is called war: and such a war, as is of 
every man, against every man... wherein men live without other security than 
what their own strength and their own inventions shall furnish them withal.” 


— THOMAS HOBBES 


Monopoly and Anarchy 


This is why anarchy, or “the war of all against all,” as Hobbes described it, 
has seldom been a satisfactory state of affairs. Local competition in the use 
of violence has usually meant paying higher costs for protection and en- 
joying less of it. Occasionally, freethinking enthusiasts for the market have 
suggested that market mechanisms alone would be sufficient to provide for 
policing of property rights and protection of life, without any need for a 
sovereignty whatsoever.*? Some of the analytics have been elegant, but the 
fact remains that free-market provision of police and justice services has 
not proven viable under the megapolitical conditions of industrialism. Only 
primitive societies where behavior is highly stereotyped and populations are 
tiny and homogeneous have been able to survive without governments to 
provide the service of locally monopolizing protection through violence. 
Examples of anarchic societies above the level of the hunting-and- 
gathering tribe are few and ancient. They are all among the simplest econo- 
mies of isolated rainwater farmers. The Kafirs in pre-Muslim Afghanistan. 
Some Irish tribes in the Dark Ages. Some Indian bands in Brazil, Venezuela, 
and Paraguay. Other aboriginals in scattered parts of the world. Their meth- 
ods of organizing protection without government are known only to connois- 
seurs of extreme cases. If you would like to learn more about them, we cite 
several books in our Notes that contain more details.*° Primitive groups were 
able to function without a distinct organization specializing in violence only 


176 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


because they were small, closed societies. And they were isolated. They 
could draw on tight kinship relations to defend against most violent threats 
on a limited scale, which were the only sort they were likely to encounter. 
When they encountered larger threats, organized by states, they were over- 
powered and subjected to rule monopolized by outside groups. This hap- 
pened over and over. Wherever societies have formed at a scale above bands 
and tribes, especially where trade routes brought different peoples into con- 
tact, specialists in violence have always emerged to plunder any surplus 
more peaceful people could produce. When technological conditions raised 
the returns to violence, they doomed societies that were not organized to 
channel large resources into making war. 


“Which princes were rendering the service of police? Which were racketeers 
or even plunderers? A plunderer could become in effect the chief of police as 
soon as he regularized his ‘take,’ adapted it to the capacity to pay, defended 
his preserve against other plunderers, and maintained his territorial monopoly 
long enough for custom to make it legitimate.”>' 


—FREDERIC C. LANE 


Government as a Seller of Protection 


As we have said at several points, government’s principal economic function 
from the perspective of those who pay the taxes is to provide protection of 
life and property. Yet the government often operates like organized crime, 
extracting resources from people within its sphere of operations as tribute or 
plunder. Government is not only a protection service; it is also a protection 
racket. While government provides protection against violence originating 
with others, like the protection racket it also charges customers for protection 
against harm that it would otherwise impose itself. The first action is an 
economic service. The second is a racket. In practice, the distinction between 
the two forms of “protection” may be difficult to make. Governments, as 
Charles Tilly has pointed out, may perhaps be best understood as “our 
largest examples of organized crime.” *? 

The activities of even the best government usually involved some mixture 
of the economic service of protection combined with extortion. Historically, 
both pursuits could be optimized if the government could impose a near- 
monopoly on coercion within the territories where it operates. In cases where 
a single armed group could establish predominance in the use of violence, 
the quality of the protection service it could provide was normally far supe- 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 177 


rior to what could be had from one of several competing protection agencies 
thrown into battle over the same territory. 


A Natural Monopoly on Land 


Achievement of a local monopoly of coercion not only allowed a government 
to more effectively protect its potential customers from violence initiated by 
others; it also greatly reduced the government’s operating costs. As Lane put 
it, “The violence-using, violence-controlling industry was a natural monop- 
oly, at least on land. Within territorial limits, the service it rendered could 
be produced much more cheaply by a monopoly.” 33 Thus a “monopoly of 
the use of force within a contiguous territory enabled a protection-producing 
enterprise to improve its product and reduce its costs.” *4 Such a governing 
organization could offer more protection with less expense if it did not have 
to engage in incessant military actions to fend off competitive groups seek- 
ing to extract protection payments from its customers. 

The prospect that information technology will help “relax” the assump- 
tion that sovereignty must be based upon a territorial monopoly has already 
attracted the attention of political theorists. It is the theme of Beyond Sover- 
eignty: Territory and Political Economy in the Twenty-first Century, by David 
J. Elkins. Elkins echoes our thesis that monopoly governments are destined 
to be disintermediated much as religious monopolies were in the years 
following 1500. He writes: “We used to assume that religions should have 
their own territory or ‘turf.’ As nations replaced universal religions as the 
sovereign arbiters of life and death, the ‘compactness’ and ‘boundedness’ of 
religion gave way to our now familiar intermingling of believers in the same 
area. Instead, we refuse to countenance the intermingling of nations, or 
provinces for that matter, although I believe this assumption is in the process 
of breaking down.” > He goes on to argue, in keeping with our view, that 
territorial monopolies on sovereignty can be broken down without anarchy, 
as evidenced by the split in sovereignty between national and provincial 
governments in a federal system like Canada’s, and by the condominium 
government involving joint French and British sovereignty that characterized 
some Pacific Islands for much of this century. Thus, while territorial monop- 
olies on sovereignty have rarely been unbundled by force, they can be 
unbundled by agreement. According to Elkins, and we agree, “The territorial 
nation has been a bundle or basket into which other facets of our lives are 
fit. It is similar to the economic concept of a ‘basket’ of goods—you cannot 
easily get items individually but must take them collectively. In a restaurant, 
one can order ‘a /a carte’; but as far as our identities are concerned, we 
must take what nations have bundled together, which amounts to ‘table 
d’hote....Government a la carte will seem natural to citizens in the 


178 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


twenty-first century.” *° There is no development that will contribute more 
dramatically to the disaggregation of sovereignty and the rise of government 
a la carte than the emergence of a cybereconomy that altogether transcends 
physical borders. 


“As frequencies rise and wavelengths drop, digital performance improves ex- 
ponentially. Bandwidth rises, power usage shrinks, antenna size shrinks, inter- 
ference collapses, error rates plummet.” 


—GEORGE GILDER 


THE LAW OF THE TELECOSM REPEALS THE LAWS OF NATIONS 


We are not alone in seeing that bandwidth (or the carrying capacity of 
communications media) is destined to trump the territorial state. Jim Taylor 
and Watts Wacker, authors of The 500-Year Delta: What Happens After 
What Comes Next, do not define their argument as we do, but they see clearly 
that “access creates globalism, and globalism disrupts political systems by 
making the concept of borders obsolete. As borders disappear, the concept 
of taxation, which supports governments, becomes increasingly fragile. . . . 
As borders disappear, the concept of entitlement—the belief that because 
you were born in a particular place, you are entitled to the economic advan- 
tages associated with that place—falls apart, and as it falls apart, the perks 
of nationhood fall apart with it. And as all that happens, the ideals that 
underlie nationhood—patriotism, democracy, the state, the melting pot, uni- 
fication, responsible participation, whatever they happen to be in whatever 
nation one is living in—get relegated to the junk heap of history.” 77 Without 
saying so explicitly, they, too, apparently sense that history is moving toward 
the liberation of the Sovereign Individual. As they say, “On the horizon waits 
a much purer form of individualism than democracy as we now understand it 
allows.” 38 How will this happen? Taylor and Wacker see a powerful dynamic 
at work: 


The simple fact is that the larger sense of patriotism—a love of nation, a sense 
of filial duty to it—is not a particularly useful predisposition to have any 
longer. . .. Citizens who thrive in the global society will identify themselves 
globally. They will make political, social, and economic choices based not on 
national identity, but on how those choices relate to themselves directly and to 
people like them around the world. ... Nations and corporations who thrive 
will organize themselves accordingly. They will maximize the freedom to 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 179 


know, to go, to do, and to be. Nations and corporations that don’t, that continue 
to fight rear-guard actions based on nostalgia, will atrophy.*? 


The devaluation of physical borders implied by the tripling of bandwidth 
each year and the geometric growth of the Internet and World Wide Web 
will accelerate the process of disintermediating governments. Indeed, a con- 
tinuation of the annual tripling of bandwidth until the year 2012 would imply 
a billionfold growth in bandwidth since 1993, when George Gilder first 
suggested that bandwidth was destined to compound even faster than the 
capacity of microprocessors. If this comes to pass—as we believe it will, 
to judge by recent breakthroughs in integrated optics—the abundance of 
communications capability that would be created would result in a fantastic 
increase in cybercommerce. With wave division multiplexing, a single fiber 
strand, as thin as a human hair, has the capacity to carry one trillion bits per 
second.*° In other words, a single fiber optic cable could accommodate 
twenty-five times more bits than the total load of all of the world’s communi- 
cations networks combined. The capacity for expansion is stupefying. With 
this much communications capacity unleashed, vastly more money will be 
Spent on communication because it will be so cheap. And such established 
media as dedicated telephony and television will become anachronisms. The 
World Wide Web will deliver a richer mix of signals to every computer 
than consumers experience with network television today. As the bandwidth 
revolution unfolds, it will draw people more and more into the borderless 
virtual world of online communities and cybercommerce, a world with 
enough graphic density to become the “metaverse,” the kind of alternative, 
cyberspace reality imagined by the science fiction novelist Neal Stephenson. 
Stephenson’s “metaverse” is a virtual community with its own laws, princes, 
and villains.*! As ever more economic activity is drawn into cyberspace, the 
value of the state’s monopoly power within borders will shrink, giving states 
a growing incentive to franchise and fragment their sovereignty. 

Just as nation-states today have incentives to host free ports, free-trade 
zones, and zona francas, so they will have incentives to lease their sover- 
eignty. We have already discussed the well-advanced negotiations between 
the nine-hundred-year-old Sovereign Military Hospitaller Order of St. John 
of Jerusalem, of Rhodes and of Malta, more commonly known as the 
Knights of Malta, and the Republic of Malta to return sovereignty over Fort 
St. Angelo to the order. We expect these negotiations to be successfully 
concluded. Others will follow. Some nation-states will cede sovereignty over 
small enclaves and remote areas to entirely new affinity groups and virtual 
communities. Indeed, it is not unlikely that commercial entities, such as 
security firms and hotel chains, will bid for sovereignty over small patches 
of territory. Wackenhut, Pinkerton, and Argenbright may, in the future, offer 


180 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


hybrid gated retirement communities and tax-free zones in attractive cli- 
mates around the world. Religious entities, like the Knights of Malta, but 
representing every conceivable denomination, will try in their own ways to 
make heaven incarnate in certain out-of-the-way corners of the earth. Even 
wealthy individuals and families will possess their own plots where they 
will exercise limited sovereignty, issue their own stamps and passports, and 
maintain a Web site. 


MONOPOLY AND PLUNDER 


Note that the incentives to share or lease sovereignty for a fee are quite 
different from those that have historically faced rulers exposed to military 
competition with their local monopoly of coercion. Leased sovereignty is no 
more destabilizing than hosting a free-trade zone. By contrast, military 
competition for power, of the kind pursued by battling warlords and guerrilla 
bands, directly affects whether the would-be government has stronger incen- 
tives to protect people within its grasp or to plunder them. Where contending 
groups wrestle and maneuver in uneasy balance, the incentives to use preda- 
tory violence increase. Plunder becomes more attractive. Because power 1s 
less stable, and the local monopoly of coercion less secure, the time horizons 
of those with the capacity to employ violence shrinks. The “king of the 
mountain” may stand on such a slippery slope that he could not expect to 
survive long enough to realize a share of the substantial gains that ultimately 
result from containing violence. When that is the case, there is little to 
prevent those who command what passes for government from employing 
their power to terrorize and pillage society. 

The logic of force, therefore, tells you that the more competing armed 
groups there are operating in any territory, the higher the likelihood that they 
will resort to predatory violence. Without a single overwhelming power to 
suppress freelance violence, it tends to proliferate, and many of the gains of 
economic and social cooperation go up in smoke. 

The damage that can occur when violence is given full reign in a condition 
of anarchy is demonstrated by the fate of China under the warlords in the 
1920s. It is a story we recounted in The Great Reckoning. The competing 
warlords imposed great damage in areas where there was no single, over- 
whelming power to keep them in check. Similar stories illustrating a similar 
point have been broadcast to the world in living color by CNN news crews 
braving the streets of Mogadishu, Somalia. The armed forces of Somalia’s 
warlords, nicknamed the “technicals,” brought anarchy to that sad country 
before the United States led a massive military intervention to contain them. 
When the commanding might of U.S. forces was withdrawn, the technicals 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 181 


brought out their weapons again, and anarchy resumed. A report in the 
Washington Post observed: 


[P]ickup trucks mounted with antiaircraft guns are once again plowing the 
dusty, rubble-strewn streets. Back too are the swaggering young men in T-shirts 
and Kalashnikov rifles slung over their shoulders, extorting money from pass- 
ing cars and buses at makeshift roadblocks. One militia-controlled neighbor- 
hood here is so heavily armed that locals refer to it as “Bosnia-Herzegovina.” 

Travelling around this city’s mean streets today is strikingly reminiscent of 
the days in 1992, when chaotic warfare among rival militias plunged Somalia 
into anarchy and a famine that prompted a U.S.-led military intervention. Once 
again, to traverse Mogadishu, travelers must hire a carload of armed thugs, 
hoping they will deliver protection for a hundred bucks a day, plus time off 
for lunch.” 


The examples of Somalia, Rwanda, and others you will soon see on 
television offer a Technicolor proof that violent competition for control of 
territory does not yield the same immediate economic gains as other forms 
of competition. To the contrary. The roving bandits and looters who compete 
under anarchy lack even the weak incentives to protect productive activity 
that sometimes lighten even the heavy hand of dictators when their rule is 
secure. 


“The society of what we call the modern age is characterized, above all in the 
West, by a certain level of monopolization. Free use of military weapons is 
denied the individual and reserved to a central authority of whatever kind, and 
likewise the taxation of the property or income of individuals is concentrated in 
the hands of a central social authority. The financial means thus flowing into 
this central authority maintain its monopoly of military force, while this in 
turn maintains the monopoly of taxation. Neither has in any sense precedence 
over the other; they are two sides of the same monopoly. If one disappears the 
other automatically follows; the monopoly rule may sometimes be shaken more 
strongly on one side than on the other.’® 


——NORBERT ELIAS 


THE EVOLUTION OF PROTECTION 


Lane developed an argument that we have misappropriated for our purposes 
in imagining how the Information Age may unfold. He argued that the 
history of Western economies since the Dark Ages can be interpreted in 


182 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


terms of four stages of competition and monopoly in the organization of 
violence. While Lane is largely silent about the megapolitical factors that 
we identify as influencing the scale at which governments operate, his explo- 
ration of the economics of violence coincides closely with the argument we 
spelled out in Blood in the Streets and The Great Reckoning, and elsewhere 
in this volume. 

We have already analyzed some of the megapolitical factors that played a 
role in the evolution of Western society following the fall of Rome. Lane 
also examined this period, focusing on the economic consequences of that 
competition to monopolize violence. He discerned four important stages in 
the functioning of economies over the past thousand years, each involving a 
different phase in the organization of violence.* 


Out of the Dark Ages 


The first stage is one of “anarchy and plunder” that marked the feudal 
revolution of a thousand years ago. While Lane does not specify the dates 
for any of his summary periods, arithmetic sets the boundary of his first 
period quite clearly, and his description of the stage of “anarchy and plun- 
der” seems to match conditions during the transition from the Dark Ages 
when the use of violence was “highly competitive, even on land.” “4 He does 
not say why, but when violence is “highly competitive,” this usually means 
that there are significant obstacles to the projection of power at any distance. 
In military terms, defense is predominant over the offense. 

For reasons we explained in Chapter 3, this stage of “anarchy and plun- 
der” coincided with falling productivity of agriculture due to adverse cli- 
matic changes. Since technology offered few effective economies of scale to 
help in securing a monopoly of violence at the time, competition between 
would-be rulers was widespread. Economic activity was smothered. 

The weakness of the economy made the problem of establishing a stable 
order worse. To create a local monopoly of violence involved too high a cost 
in military activity in proportion to the meager value of economic turnover. 
Without the capacity to enforce an effective monopoly over an economically 
viable territory, the armed knights on horseback terrorized and plundered 
while providing little in the way of “protection” for their customers. 


Feudalism 


“The second stage begins when small regional or provincial monopolies are 
established. Agricultural production then rises, and most of the surplus is 


* Note that Lane’s four stages of competition and monopoly in the use of violence are 
different from the four stages in the organization of economic life that we identify— 
namely, foraging, farming, industrialism, and the Information Age. 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 183 


collected by recently established monopolists of violence.” * Still, the sur- 
plus is relatively meager during this second stage, which we identify with 
the early Middle Ages. Economic growth is held down by the absence of 
advantages of scale in the organization of violence, which keeps the military 
costs of enforcing local monopolies high. But while the costs remain high, 
the price that minisovereignties can charge for protection rises, since eco- 
nomic activity expands when anarchy is curtailed. 

“During a late phase of the second stage many tribute takers attract 
customers by special offers to agricultural and commercial enterprise. They 
offer protection at low prices for those who will bring new lands into cultiva- 
tion, and special policing services to encourage trade such as that organized 
by the Counts of Champagne for merchants coming to their fairs.” *° In other 
words, when they were able to establish a sufficient control over territory to 
negotiate credibly, local warlords did what local merchants do when they 
need to increase market share: they discounted their services to attract cus- 
tomers. The warlords later used the added resources from additional eco- 
nomic activity to consolidate their control over larger territories. Once that 
control was firmly established, they began to enjoy more of the advantages 
of monopoly. Their military costs for policing tended to fall, and they could 
also increase the price they charged without worrying that this made their 
service less attractive to customers. 

In this complicated stage in Western history, those who employ violence, 
the medieval lords and monarchs, take most of the surplus above subsistence. 
There are few merchants. The most successful are those who are best able 
to evade or minimize the taxes, fees, and other costs imposed by those 
demanding money for “protection services.” 


The Early-Modern Period 


A third stage is reached when the merchants and landowners who are not 
also specialists in violence “are getting more of the economy’s surplus 
than are fief holders and monarchs. ...In this third stage, the enterprises 
specializing in the use of violence receive less of the surplus than do enter- 
prises that buy protection from the governments.” 4” Since successful mer- 
chants are more likely to reinvest their profits than consume them, the higher 
profits of merchants in that stage in history led to self-reinforcing growth. 


The Factory Age 


Lane identifies the passage from the third to the fourth stage with the 
emergence of technological and industrial innovations as more important 
factors in earning profits than lowering the costs of protection. By this, Lane 
seems to refer to the period since 1750. From that time on, the character of 


184 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


technology began to play a clearly dominating role in the prosperity of 
regions. To take an extreme case, even areas where no government existed 
at all, as was the case in some parts of New Zealand, for example, prior to 
1840, were not likely to become highly prosperous simply because they paid 
no taxes. At that point in history, innovations in industrial technology were 
more important to achieving profits than any savings that could be had by 
lowering the costs for protection, even to zero. As the scale of government 
rose, the credit and financing mechanisms originally pioneered by govern- 
ments to raise resources for military operations became available to finance 
business enterprises of larger scale. 

Although Lane does not say so, the concentration of technological advan- 
tages in a given locale reduced the competition between jurisdictions and al- 
lowed “enterprises specializing in the use of violence,” or governments, to 
charge higher prices. When there are large technological gaps between the 
competitors in one jurisdiction and another, as there were during the Indus- 
trial Age, entrepreneurs in the jurisdictions with the best technology tend to 
make more money, even though they may have to pay higher taxes and other 
costs to their governments. 


Plunder with a Smile 


Governments in the Industrial Age enjoyed a delightful monopoly to exploit. 
Their actual costs for providing protection of life and limb were vanishingly 
small relative to the prices (taxes) they charged. Yet they really were in a 
realm where competition was so perverse that they could engage far more in 
the business of plunder than in that of protection and still have that fact go 
all but unnoticed. It was a rare moment in history. 

The drawbacks of anarchy under the megapolitical conditions of industri- 
alism made competition in protection services within the same territory 
technologically infeasible. The only way to achieve effective protection 
under those conditions was to command a greater capability to employ 
violence. Therefore there was little to be gained by attempting to better 
distinguish that portion of one’s taxes that went, in Lane’s words, “as pay- 
ment for the service rendered” from “another part that one is tempted to 
call plunder.” ** The distinction was surely real enough. But since one was 
stuck paying the taxes in any event, developing it fully had little to commend 
it other than satisfying morbid curiosity. As Lane said, no matter what 
portion of the taxes was plunder they were a price one had to pay “to avoid 
more severe losses.” #” 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 185 


The Rise of Incomes Under Industrialism 


Part of the reason this dilemma was tolerable during the past two centuries 
of domination by the nation-state was the fact that incomes were rising 
dramatically, particularly in the jurisdictions where most industrial develop- 
ment was confined. Those running the OECD governments took a higher 
percentage of incomes almost every year. But the increase in plunder was 
nonetheless accompanied by far greater prosperity, and a greater inequality 
of wealth with the rest of the world. Under such conditions, objections to 
the surge of taxation were inevitably marginal and insufficient to deflect 
events from their logical progression. Indeed, for reasons spelled out in 
previous chapters, the military survival of an industrial nation-state largely 
depended upon the fact that no effective limits could be placed upon its 
claims on the resources of its citizens. 

In every industrial state, policies meandered in more or less the same 
direction. At the high-water mark of industrialism after World War II, the 
rate of marginal income taxes reached 90 percent or higher. This was a far 
more aggressive assertion of the right of the state to extract resources than 
even the Oriental despots of the early hydraulic civilizations were prone to 
make. Yet the industrial version of plunder followed its own logic. Much of 
it was determined by the character of industrial technology in the first half 
of the twentieth century that we described earlier. 

This technology made it all but inevitable that the state would seize and 
redistribute a large fraction of income, with much of the burden of the 
plunder falling upon a small segment of capitalists. Most industrial processes 
were heavily dependent on natural resources, and therefore tied to the sites 
where the resources were located. A steel mill, a mine, or a port could be 
moved only at staggering expense, or not at all. Such facilities were therefore 
Stationary targets that could easily be taxed. Property, corporate, and sever- 
ance taxes grew sharply over this century. So did income taxes, first on 
the capitalists, but eventually on the workers themselves. The advent of 
large-scale industrial employment made a broadly based income tax 
practical. Wages could be garnished at the source, with the tax authorities 
coordinating collections with the accounting departments of industrial firms. 
We take this for granted today, but collecting an income tax at the factory 
gate was a far simpler task than fanning out over the countryside to 
squeeze a portion of the profits from millions of independent craftsmen and 
farmers. 

In short, industrial technology tended to make taxation more routinized, 
more predictable, and less personally dangerous than taxation in many ear- 
lier periods. Nonetheless, it extracted a higher percentage of society’s re- 
sources than any form of sovereignty had done before. 


186 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Protecting What? 


The fact that societies could become richer while the total percentage of 
income absorbed in taxes rose significantly invites a question about the 
character of the protection that governments provided to industrial econo- 
mies. What were they protecting? Our answer: primarily industrial installa- 
tions with high capital costs and significant vulnerability to attack. The 
presence of large-scale industrial firms would not have been possible in a 
disordered environment with more competitive violence, even if the result 
of the competition had been to shrink the overall share of output taken by 
government. 

This is why capital-intensive operations are uneconomic in the American 
slums, as well as in Third World societies where ad hoc violence is endemic. 
Industrial society as a whole was able to proceed because a certain kind of 
order was established and maintained. Enterprises were subject to regular, 
predictable shakedowns, rather than erratic violence. 

Even during the height of industrialism, it was always an exaggeration to 
speak of a government employing a “monopoly of force.” All governments 
try to maintain such a monopoly, but as we have seen, employees of indus- 
trial corporations usually found that they were able to employ violence 
against their employers. As long as the general public has access to any arms 
at all, or a disorderly crowd retains the physical capacity to overturn a bus 
or throw rocks at police, those who control the government do not totally 
monopolize force. They merely control predominant force, dominant to a 
degree that it becomes uneconomic for most people to compete with them 
under existing conditions. 


2 
a 


“A Net-based government can operate only by consent of the governed. Any 
Net government must therefore provide its citizens with real benefits if it wants 
them to stick around. Those benefits may not be just personal goods or ser- 
vices, but rather the broader benefits of a regulatory regime: a clean, transpar- 
ent marketplace with defined rules and consequences, or a supervised 
community where children can trust the people they encounter of individuals 
privacy is protected.” *° 


—ESTHER DYSON 


The Information Age 


The Information Age is bringing into being a fifth stage in the evolution of 
competition in the use of violence in the West. This stage was not anticipated 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 187 


by Lane. This fifth phase involves competition in cyberspace, an arena not 
subject to monopolization by any “violence-using enterprise.” It is not sub- 
ject to monopolization because it is not a territory. 

Although Lane’s argument incorporates conventional postwar assump- 
tions about the inevitability of the nation-state, he recognized a point that 
will be more crucial to understanding the future than it may have seemed 
forty or fifty years ago. That is the fact that governments have never estab- 
lished stable monopolies of coercion over the open sea. Think about it. No 
government’s laws have ever exclusively applied there. This is a matter of 
the utmost importance in understanding how the organization of violence 
and protection will evolve as the economy migrates into cyberspace, which 
has no physical existence at all. For the same reasons that Lane noted in 
observing that no government has ever been able to monopolize violence on 
the sea, it is even less likely that a government could successfully monopo- 
lize an infinite realm without physical boundaries. 


COMPETITION WITHOUT ANARCHY 


In the past, when conditions made it difficult for any single violence- 
wielding entity to establish a monopoly, the results were anarchy and plun- 
der. The Information Age, however, has changed the technological terms 
under which violence is organized and done so in a profound way. Unlike 
the past, when the inability to monopolize protection in a region meant 
higher military costs and lower economic returns, the fact that governments 
cannot monopolize cyberspace actually implies lower military costs and 
higher economic returns. This is because information technology creates a 
new dimension in protection. For the first time in history, information tech- 
nology allows for the creation and protection of assets that lie entirely 
outside the realm of any individual government’s territorial monopoly on 
violence. 


“Countries in which the units of political power and governance are multiple 
and which lack a central, stable, unchallenged supervisory source of jurisdic- 
tion and power have to devise their own working solutions for dealing with 
the problems raised by such frontiers.” >} 


—REES DAVIES 


188 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


The Analogy with the Frontier 


Cyberspace is in one sense the equivalent of a technologically protected 
march region of the kind that existed in border areas during the Middle 
Ages. In the past, when the reach of lords and kings was weak, and the 
claims of one or more overlapped at a frontier, something akin to competitive 
government existed. A look at how the march regions functioned could give 
insights into how laws of the march or something like them may migrate 
into cyberspace. 

Andorra survives as a kind of fossilized march region between France and 
Spain, an artifact of megapolitical conditions that made it difficult for either 
kingdom to dominate the other in that cold and almost inaccessible area of 
190 square miles in the Pyrenees. In 1278, an agreement was struck dividing 
suzerainty over Andorra between local French and Spanish feudal lords, the 
French count of Foix and the Spanish bishop of Urgel. Each appointed one of 
two “viquiers” who sparingly exercised the minimal authority of government 
in Andorra, mostly by commanding the tiny Andorran militia, now a police 
force. The count’s role was long ago superseded by history. The French 
government now stands in for him from Paris. Among its duties is to accept 
half of the annual tribute that Andorra pays, an amount less than a single 
month’s rent in a fleabag apartment. The bishop of Urgel continues to receive 
his share of the tribute, just as his predecessors did in the Middle Ages. 

As the split tribute implies, there have been two sources of “supervisory 
jurisdiction and power” rather than one in Andorra. Appeals from Andorran 
civil suits were traditionally lodged either with the Episcopal College of 
Urgel or the Court of Cassation in Paris. 

A consequence of Andorra’s ambiguous position was that almost no laws 
were enacted. Andorra has enjoyed vanishingly small government and no 
taxes for more than seven hundred years. Today, that gives it a growing 
appeal as a tax haven. But until a generation ago, Andorra was famously 
poor. Once thickly wooded, it was deforested over the centuries by residents 
trying to stay warm in the bitter winters. The whole place is snowed shut 
from November through April each year. Even in summer, Andorra is so 
cold that crops grow only on the southern slopes. If our description makes it 
seem unappealing, you have just learned the secret of its success. Andorra 
survived as a feudal enclave in the age of the nation-state because it was 
remote and dirt-poor. 

At one time, there were numerous medieval frontier or “march” regions 
where sovereignties blended together. These violent frontiers persisted for 
decades or sometimes for centuries in the border areas of Europe. Most were 
poor. As we mentioned earlier, there were marches between areas of Celtic 
and English control in Ireland; between Wales and England, Scotland and 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 189 


England, Italy and France, France and Spain, Germany and the Slav frontiers 
of Central Europe, and between the Christian kingdoms of Spain and the 
Islamic kingdom of Granada. Like Andorra, these march regions developed 
distinct institutional and legal forms of a kind that we are likely to see again 
in the next millennium. 

Because of the competitive position of the two authorities, each of which 
was weak, rulers would sometimes even solicit volunteers among their sub- 
jects to settle in march regions in order to increase the reach of their author- 
ity. Almost as a matter of course, the subjects were lured into settling in the 
march by freedom from taxes. Given the delicate margins upon which they 
competed, if either authority in a march attempted to impose taxes, he would 
make it more difficult for his followers to make ends meet, as well as give 
everyone a reason to affiliate with his competitor. Therefore, residents of a 
march usually had a choice in deciding whose laws they were to obey. This 
choice was based upon the weakness of the competing authorities; it was not 
an ideological gesture. 

Nonetheless, practical difficulties arose that had to be resolved. Under 
feudalism, landlords who owned property on both sides of a nominal frontier 
faced a serious conflict of duties. For example, a lord on the frontier of 
Scotland and England who held properties in both kingdoms could theoreti- 
cally owe military service to both in the event of war. To resolve this contra- 
dictory obligation, almost everyone up and down the feudal hierarchy could 
choose whose laws to obey through a legal process called avowal. 

Information technology will create equivalent opportunities for competi- 
tive choice in domiciling economic activities, but with important differences. 
One is that unlike the medieval frontier societies, cyberspace is likely to be 
in due course the richest of economic realms. It will therefore tend to be a 
growing rather than a receding frontier. Few persons at the core regions of 
medieval society would have wished to move to frontiers without strong 
inducements, often including religious imperatives, because these regions 
tended to be violent and poor. Therefore, they did not act as magnets drawing 
resources out of the control of the authorities. Cyberspace will. 

Secondly, the new frontier will not be a duopoly, which invites collusion 
between the two authorities to compromise over their frontier claims. Such 
compromises tended not to be effective during the medieval period for 
two reasons: there were frequently sharp cultural gaps between the rival 
authorities; and more important, they lacked the physical capacity to impose 
a negotiated settlement, having insufficient military power on the ground. 
During the era of the nation-state, when national authorities did come to 
exercise sufficient military power to impose solutions, most march regions 
and vague frontiers disappeared. Border fixing became the norm. That is a 
stable solution if duopolists of violence face the prospect of dividing their 


190 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


authority over contiguous regions. But the competition in domiciling trans- 
actions in the cybereconomy will not be between two authorities, but be- 
tween hundreds of authorities throughout the globe. For the territorial states 
to create an effective cartel to keep tax rates high will be all but impossible. 
This will be true for the same reason that collusion to enjoy monopoly prices 
in markets with hundreds of competitors does not work. 

For evidence, consider the move by the Seychelles, a tiny country in the 
Indian Ocean, to enact a new investment law that U.S. government officials 
describe as a “Welcome Criminals” act. Under the law, anyone who invests 
$10 million in the Seychelles will not only be guaranteed protection against 
extradition, but will be issued a diplomatic passport. Contrary to the asser- 
tions of the U.S. government, however, the intended beneficiaries are not 
drug dealers, who are generally under the protection of more important 
governments in any event, but independent entrepreneurs who have become 
politically incorrect. The first potential beneficiary of the Seychelles law is 
a white South African who became wealthy by circumventing the economic 
sanctions against the former apartheid regime. Now he faces the danger of 
economic retribution by the new South African government and is willing 
to pay the Seychelles for protection.** 

Whatever the merits of any individual case, the example shows why at- 
tempts by governments to maintain a cartel for protection on the ground are 
doomed to failure. Unlike the medieval frontier, in which the competition 
was between two authorities only, the frontier in cybercommerce will be 
between hundreds of jurisdictions, with the number probably rising rapidly 
to thousands. 

In the age of the virtual corporation, individuals will choose to domicile 
their income-earning activities in a jurisdiction that provides the best service 
at the lowest cost. In other words, sovereignty wall be commercialized. 
Unlike medieval frontier societies, which were in most cases impoverished 
and violent, cyberspace will be neither. The competition that information 
technology is driving governments to engage in is not competition of a 
military kind, but competition in quality and price of an economic service 
—genuine protection. In short, governments will be obliged to give custom- 
ers what they want. 


The Diminished Utility of Violence 


This is not to say, of course, that governments will resign from employing 
violence. Far from it. Rather, what we are saying is that violence is losing a 
good deal of its leverage. One possible reaction on the part of governments 
would be to intensify their use of violence in local settings in an attempt to 
compensate for its declining global significance. Whatever governments do, 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 191 


however, they will be unable to saturate cyberspace with violence in the way 
that they saturated the territories they monopolized with violence in the 
modern world. No matter how many governments try to enter cyberspace, 
they will be no more capable or powerful in that realm than anyone else. 

Ironically, attempts by nation-states to wage “information wars” to domi- 
nate or thwart access to cyberspace would probably only accelerate their 
own demise. The tendency toward the devolution of large systems 1s already 
powerful because of the fallaway of scale economies and the rising costs of 
holding fragmenting social groups together. The irony of information wars 
is that they could well impose more of a shock to the brittle systems left 
over from the Industrial Age than to the emerging information economy 
itself. 

As long as essential information technology continues to function, cyber- 
commerce could proceed in tandem with the struggles of information war in 
a way that could never happen in a territorial war. You could not imagine 
millions of commercial transactions taking place at the front in one of the 
twentieth century’s wars. But virtual wars may not exhaust any capacity of 
cyberspace to host multiple activities. And because virtual reality does not 
exist, there will be little danger of proximity, and almost none of being hit 
by exploding virtual shrapnel. 


Vulnerability of Large-Scale Systems 


The dangers of information war will mostly be dangers to large-scale indus- 
trial systems that operate with central command and control. Military au- 
thorities in the United States and other leading nation-states are both 
planning for and fearing acts of information sabotage that could have severe 
consequences for disabling large systems. An act of cyberwarfare could 
close down a telephone switching station, disrupt air traffic control, or sabo- 
tage a pumping system that regulates the flow of water to a city. A pro- 
grammed virus could even close down conventional or nuclear generators, 
turning off segments of the electric grid. So-called logic bombs could scram- 
ble a great deal of information, the most sensitive of which is in central 
control systems operating vulnerable, large-scale systems inherited from the 
Industrial Age. Short of a massive and comprehensive destruction of all 
information technology, which would bring the world economy literally to a 
halt, cybercommerce and virtual reality will remain beyond the capacity of 
any government to stifle, much less monopolize. 

Even one of the signal drawbacks of information technology, the apparent 
vulnerability of information-storage systems to decay and destruction, has 
been largely resolved by new archival technology. A new system called 
“High-Density Read-Only Memory,” or “HD-ROM,” employs an ion mill 


192 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


similar to those used in computer-aided manufacturing systems to create 
archives in a vacuum. Storage capacity is now as high as 25,000 megabytes 
per square inch. Unlike earlier systems that were vulnerable to early decay 
and disruption by shock, data stored in HD-ROM promises to be around for 
the duration. One of HD-ROM’s developers, Bruce Lamartine, says, “It’s 
virtually impervious to the ravages of time, thermal and mechanical shock, 
or the electromagnetic fields that are so destructive to other storage medi- 
ums.” *? Even the detonation of a blast by nuclear terrorists would not neces- 
sarily scramble or destroy vital information, such as the codes to digital 
money, upon which the smooth functioning of a cybereconomy will depend. 


“Modern armies are so dependent on information that it is possible to blind 
and deafen them in order to achieve victory without fighting in the conven- 
tional sense.” *4 


—COL. ALAN CAMPEN, U.S.A.F. (Ret.) 


SUPERPOWERS OF VIRTUAL WARFARE 


The assumptions of the nation-state at war will make less and less megapo- 
litical sense as the importance of information in warfare increases. Because 
it has no physical existence, cyberspace is not a realm in which magnitudes 
as we know them in the physical world carry any commanding importance. 
It does not matter how many programmers were involved in stipulating a 
sequence of commands. All that matters is whether the program functions. 
The Sovereign Individual may truly count for as much in cyberspace as does 
a nation-state, with its seat in the UN, its own flag, and an army deployed on 
the ground. In purely economic terms, some Sovereign Individuals already 
command investible incomes in the hundreds of millions annually, sums that 
exceed the discretionary spending power of some of the bankrupt nation- 
states. But that is not all. In terms of virtual warfare waged through the 
manipulation of information, some individuals may loom as large or larger 
than many of the world’s states. One bizarre genius, working with digital 
servants, could theoretically achieve the same impact in a cyberwar as a 
nation-state. Bill Gates certainly could. 

In this sense, the age of the Sovereign Individual is not merely a slogan. 
A hacker, or a small group of mathematicians, not to mention a company 
like Microsoft, or almost any computer software company, could in principle 
do any or all of the things that the Pentagon’s Cyber War Task Force has up 
its sleeves. There are hundreds of firms in the Silicon Valley and elsewhere 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 193 


that already have a greater capacity to wage a cyberwar than 90 percent of 
the existing nation-states. 

Events of 1998 brought testimony from the U.S. President and his top 
aides that the leading enemy of the United States was not another nation- 
state, but Osama bin Laden, an exiled Saudi millionaire. The claim that Bin 
Laden, an individual, was a significant threat to the greatest military power 
of the Industrial Age was backed up by a barrage of cruise missiles. We are 
not altogether convinced that Bin Laden was not merely picked out to play 
the part of the “Richard Jewell of the Nairobi bombing.” But be that as it 
may, if an individual like Bin Laden could be convincing as a dire threat to 
the United States as a terrorist, he or another multimillionaire could be even 
more convincing as a cyberterrorist, for cybertechnology puts individuals at 
a lesser disadvantage in confronting large groups than they face in the realm 
of explosives and missiles. 

The presumption that governments will continue to monopolize life on 
the ground as alternative avenues for protection open on all sides is an 
anachronism. A far more likely outcome is that nation-states will have to be 
reconfigured to reduce their vulnerability to computer viruses, logic bombs, 
infected wires, and trapdoor programs that could be monitored by the U.S. 
National Security Agency, or some teenage hacker. 

The megapolitical logic of cyberspace suggests that central command- 
and-control systems that currently dominate the world’s large-scale infra- 
structure will have to be replaced by multicentric models of security with 
distributed capabilities so they cannot be easily captured or blocked by a 
computer virus. New types of software, known as agoric open systems, will 
replace command-and-control software inherited from the Industrial Age. 
That older software allocated computational capacity according to rigid 
priorities in much the same way that the central planners at Gosplan in the 
former Soviet Union used to allocate goods to boxcars by rigid rules. The 
new systems are controlled by algorithms that mock market mechanisms to 
allocate resources more efficiently by an internal bidding process that mim- 
ics the competitive processes in the brain. Instead of giant computer monop- 
olies conducting important command-and-control functions, they will be 
decentralized in the new millennium. 

There is no better example of the resilience of distributed networks com- 
pared to command-and-control systems than that given by Digital Equipment 
at its Palo Alto research lab. An engineer opened the door to a closet that 
housed the company’s own computer network. As recounted by Kevin Kelly, 
the engineer dramatically “yanked a cable out of its guts. The network 
routed around the breach and didn’t falter a bit.” °° 

The Information Age will not only facilitate competition without anarchy 
in cyberspace; it will inevitably lead to the redesign of important systems 


194. THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


left over from industrialism. Such a reconfiguration is essential to make 
them less vulnerable to mischief that could come from anyone or anywhere. 
Just as the Industrial Age inevitably led to the reconfiguration of institutions 
that were left over from the medieval period, such as schools and universities, 
so the leftover institutions of the Industrial Age are likely to devolve in 
miniature form, in ways that reflect the logic of microtechnology. 

The need for protection against bandits on the Information Superhighway 
will require widespread adopting of public key—private key encryption algo- 
rithms. These already allow any individual user of a personal computer to 
encode any message more securely than the Pentagon could have sealed its 
launch codes only a generation ago. These powerful, unbreakable forms of 
encryption will be necessary to secure financial transactions from hackers 
and thieves. 

They will also be necessary for another reason. Private financial institu- 
tions and central banks will adopt unbreakable encryption algorithms when 
they realize that the U.S. government—and it may not be alone—has the 
capacity to penetrate current bank software and computer systems to literally 
bankrupt a country or sweep the bank account of anyone living almost 
anywhere. There is no technological reason why any individual or any coun- 
try should leave his financial deposits or transactions at the mercy of the 
U.S. National Security Agency or the successors to the KGB, or any similar 
organization, licit or illicit. 

Encryption algorithms impenetrable by governments are not daydreams. 
They are available already as shareware over the Internet. When low-orbit 
satellite systems are fully operable, individuals using advanced personal 
computers with antennae no larger than those on portable phones will be 
able to communicate anywhere on the globe without even interfacing with 
the telephone system. It will no more be possible for a government to 
monopolize cyberspace, a realm with no physical existence at all, than it 
would have been for medieval knights to control transactions in the industrial 
period astride a heavy charger. 


Protection by Stealth 


Information societies will place vast resources outside the realm of preda- 
tion. When cyberspace comes increasingly to host financial transactions and 
other forms of commerce, the resources employed there will be more or less 
immune to ordinary shakedowns and theft. Therefore, predators will be 
unable to harness as large a share of resources as they do today and have 
done through much of the twentieth century. 

Inevitably, therefore, government protection of a large part of the world’s 
wealth will be redundant. Government will be no better situated to protect a 


The Megapolitics of the Information Age 195 


bank balance in cyberspace than you are. As government will be less neces- 
sary, its relative price is likely to fall for that reason alone. There are others. 

With a large and growing share of financial transactions occurring in 
cyberspace in the new millennium, individuals will have a choice of jurisdic- 
tions in which to lodge them. This will create intense competition to price 
government’s services (the taxes it charges) on a nonmonopolistic basis. 
This is revolutionary. As George Melloan argued in The Wall Street Journal, 
the one institution that has most successfully resisted the forces of global 
competition has been the welfare state. “A study by researchers at the 
Wharton School and the Australian National University discussed the forces 
coming to bear on income transfers. Geoffrey Garrett and Deborah Mitchell 
concluded that ‘there is virtually no evidence that increased market integra- 
tion has put downward pressures on their most fundamental welfare pro- 
grams.’ To the contrary, they write, “governments have invariably responded 
to increased integration into international markets by increasing income 
transfers.’ ” °° The advent of the cybereconomy will at long last finally ex- 
pose the welfare state to genuine competition. It will change the nature of 
sovereignties and transform economies, as the balance between protection 
and extortion swings more completely on the side of protection than it has 
ever done before. 


Chapter / 


THANOLENIING 
LUCALITY 


The Emergence of the 
Cybereconomy 


“The real issue is control. The Internet is too widespread to be easily 
dominated by any single government. By creating a seamless global- 
economic zone, anti-sovereign and unregulatable, the Internet calls into 
question the very idea of a nation-state.” ' 


—JOHN PERRY BARLOW 


he 


The Information Superhighway has become one of the more familiar meta- 
phors of the early days of the digital age. It is remarkable not only for its 
pervasiveness, but also for the common misunderstanding it betrays about 
the cybereconomy. A highway, after all, is an industrial version of a footpath, 
a network for the physical transit of people and goods. The information 
economy is not like a highway, a railroad, or a pipeline. It does not haul or 
transport information from point to point the way the Trans-Canada Highway 
carries heavy trucks from Alberta to New Brunswick. What the world calls 
the “Information Superhighway” is not merely a transit link. It is the desti- 
nation. 

Cyberspace transcends locality. It involves nothing less than the instanta- 
neous sharing of data everywhere and nowhere at once. The emerging infor- 
mation economy is based in the interconnections linking and relinking 


Transcending Locality 197 


millions of users of millions of computers. Its essence lies in the new 
possibilities that arise from these connections. As John Perry Barlow put it, 
“What the Net offers is the promise of a new social space, global and 
anti-sovereign, within which anybody, anywhere can express to the rest of 
humanity whatever he or she believes without fear. There is in these new 
media a foreshadowing of the intellectual and economic liberty that might 
undo all the authoritarian powers on earth.” ? 

Cyberspace, like the imaginary realm of Homer’s gods, is a realm apart 
from the familiar terrestrial world of farm and factory. Yet its consequences 
will not be imaginary, but real. To a far greater extent than many now 
understand, the instantaneous sharing of information will be like a solvent 
dissolving large institutions. It will not only alter the logic of violence, as 
we have already explored; it will radically alter information and transaction 
costs that determine how businesses organize and the way the economy 
functions. We expect microprocessing to change the economic organization 
of the world. 


“It is today possible, to a greater extent than at any time in the world’s history, 
for a company to locate anywhere, to use resources from anywhere to produce 
a product that can be sold anywhere.” 


—MILTON FRIEDMAN 


THE TYRANNY OF PLACE 


The fact that the fading industrial era’s first stab at conceiving the informa- 
tion economy is to think of it in terms of a gigantic public works project 
tells you how grounded our thinking is in the paradigms of the past. It is 
rather like hearing farmers at the end of the eighteenth century describe a 
factory as “a farm with a roof.” Yet the “superhighway” metaphor is more 
revealing than that. It also betrays the extent to which we are hostage to the 
tyranny of place. Even when technology enables us to transcend locality, the 
instrument of our deliverance is given a nickname describing it as a route 
from place to place. Like salmon marked by their homing instinct, our 
consciousness is still deeply etched by notions of locality. 

For the whole of history until now, economies have been tethered to a 
local geographic area. Most people who lived before the twentieth century 
passed their days like de facto prisoners under house arrest, seldom ventur- 
ing more than a few days’ walk from where they were born. A journey of 
any distance was the work of generations. Only occasionally did some crisis 


198 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


—war, pestilence, an adverse shift in climate—stimulate a broad migration. 
To move human beings out of a wretched village required something spec- 
tacular and pressing. Nothing less could stimulate people to bundle up their 
belongings and wander off in search of a better life. 

Until recently, the few who looked outside their own locale for opportu- 
nity often became famous. Consider that Marco Polo is still renowned for 
having traipsed the Eurasian continent to visit the court of the Great Khan. 
He was the exception in his time. Few other travelogues survive from the 
premodern period. Among the more widely read, Mandeville '’s Travels, writ- 
ten in French in 1357, is notable for having been composed by someone who 
probably never left Europe. Mandeville conveys delightful and often fanciful 
details about life around the globe, including the suggestion that many 
Ethiopians have only one foot: “[T]he foot is so large that it shadoweth all 
the body against the sun when they will lie and rest them.” ? Clearly, few of 
Mandeville’s contemporaries who read his popular story were likely to have 
known that his Ethiopian “Bigfoot” did not exist. 

Not until the modern age began with the journeys of exploration at the 
very end of the fifteenth century were there sustained contacts between the 
continents. Intrepid captains like Christopher Columbus and Vasco da Gama 
who set out to capture the spice trade were extraordinary enough to be 
remembered in every literate household for the better part of five centuries. 

From the advent of farming until recent generations, life was characterized 
by its immobility. This is all but forgotten today, particularly in the European 
settlement colonies of the “New World,” where movement is more fluid and 
everyone tends to draw his perspective from the vantage point of an immi- 
grant. A theme of elementary education in North America is that the colo- 
nists came from Europe seeking freedom and opportunity, which is true. 
What is seldom told, however, is how reluctant most people were to take the 
trip, even when faced with destitution at home. The few who did migrate 
suffered what are in today’s terms unimaginable ordeals to establish them- 
selves. Only the most enterprising or the most desperate of the poor came. 
In the middle of the seventeenth century, inmates locked up in Bridewell, 
London’s notorious house of correction, revolted to show “their unwilling- 
ness to go to Virginia.”* In 1720, there were riots in the streets of Paris 
to free vagabonds, thieves, and murderers scheduled for deportation to 
Louisiana. 


Narrow Horizons 


Physical difficulties of communication and transport, compounded at most 
times and places by limited language skills, kept the focus of human action 
narrow and local. As recently as the early twentieth century, it was common 


Transcending Locality 199 


to find Chinese villages lying only five miles apart speaking mutually unin- 
telligible dialects, even along the coast. The local organization of almost all 
economies imposed a penalty of narrow markets and lost opportunity. Factor 
costs were kept high due to limited competition. Access to specialized skills 
was minimal. With incomes so low they scraped the margins of destitution, 
and no access to outside capital or efficient insurance markets, small farmers 
in much of the world were trapped in poverty. We have explored some of the 
difficulties imposed upon peasants by the confines of closed village life. 
Even now, as we write, at least a billion people, mostly in Asia and Africa, 
struggle to survive on less than a dollar a day. 


“ALL POLITICS IS LOCAL” 


To a greater extent than is commonly realized, the immobility of people 
and their assets has informed the way we see the world. Even those who 
seem most ready to agree that the earth is a small place as the twentieth 
century ends continue to think in terms constrained by antiquated concepts 
of industrial politics. This is underscored by a slogan that became popular 
among environmentalists in the 1980s: “Think globally but act locally.” It is 
an injunction that mirrors the logic of politics, a logic that has always turned 
on local power advantages. 

The local habit of mind has been dictated by the megapolitics of all past 
societies. All topographical features that serve as barriers or facilitators to 
the exercise of power are local. Every river, every mountain, every island is 
local. Climate is local. Temperature, rainfall, and growing conditions vary as 
you climb up and over a mountain. Every microbe that circulates, circulates 
somewhere, and not in some other place. 

Little wonder that the tyranny of place permeates our concepts of how 
society must organize and function. The power advantages that have given 
one group or another a local monopoly on violence have heretofore always 
originated someplace and faded along the megapolitical margins where bor- 
ders are drawn. That is why there has never been a world government. 

While the importance of place to the exercise of power has rarely been 
made explicit, some advocates of compulsion to redistribute the rewards of 
human action began to sense the declining leverage of place as long ago as 
the 1930s. They saw in modern transportation a division of social space 
between the highly paid and the poor. This fear was captured by John Dos 
Passos in The Big Money: “The ‘vag’ sits on the edge of the highway, 
broken, hungry. Overhead, flies a transcontinental plane filled with highly 
paid executives. The upper class has taken to the air, the lower class to the 
road: there is no longer any bond between them, they are two nations.” > 


200 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


This is another way of saying that improved transportation reduced the 
leverage of extortion simply by increasing the choice of places where suc- 
cessful persons might choose to be. Certainly, the vagabond on the road 
below was in no position to press for a handout from those flying overhead. 
The tendencies that Dos Passos observed sixty years ago have only become 
more pronounced. 


Mass Transit 


In 1995, a million persons crossed borders somewhere in the world each 
day. This represents a startling change from the past. Before the twentieth 
century, travel was so infrequent that most borders were simply frontiers, 
not barriers to transit. Passports were unknown. The development of ocean 
liners, trains, and other improved forms of transportation dramatically in- 
creased movement. But this movement became more heavily regulated by 
states whose powers were increased by the same improvements in transporta- 
tion and communications that made civilian travel cheaper and easier. The 
advent of movies and, especially, television also did a great deal to open 
horizons and stimulate travel and immigration. Yet until now, the bedrock 
assumptions of social and economic organization have remained anchored 
in locality. 


“...to avoid that Failure of Nerve for which history exacts so merciless a 
penalty—we must have the courage to follow all technical extrapolations to 
their logical conclusion.” ° 


—r ARTHUR C. CLARKE 


THE ERROR OF MINIMAL EXPECTATIONS 


The geographic tether on imagination is still so tight that some experts 
examining the Internet in 1995 concluded that it has little commercial poten- 
tial and almost no significance other than as an electronic medium for chat 
and an outlet for pornography. The many doubters of the economic impor- 
tance of cyberspace are the Colonel Blimps of the Information Age. Their 
complacency rivals that of the British establishment facing the decline of the 
empire in the 1930s. Whenever elites find themselves threatened, their first 
reaction is denial. This is evidenced by the fond hope that the Internet will 
never amount to much, sometimes endorsed by authorities who should know 
better. We referred earlier to David Kline and Daniel Burstein’s work, Road 
Warriors: Dreams and Nightmares Along the Information Highway. Their 


Transcending Locality 201 


dismissal of the economic potential of the Net is another proof that being 
technically well-informed is not synonymous with understanding the conse- 
quences of technology.’ 

Even the most technically expert observers in the past have frequently 
failed to grasp the implications of new technologies. A British parliamentary 
committee, convened in 1878 to consider the prospects for Thomas Edison’s 
incandescent lamp, reported Edison’s ideas to be “good enough for our 
transatlantic friends, .. . but unworthy of the attention of practical or scien- 
tific men.” * Thomas Edison himself was a man of great vision, but he 
thought that the phonograph he invented would be employed mainly by 
businessmen for dictation. Only a short time before the Wright brothers 
proved that airplanes would fly, the distinguished American astronomer 
Simon Newcomb authoritatively demonstrated why heavier-than-air flight 
was impossible. He concluded: “The demonstration that no possible combi- 
nation of known substances, known forms of machinery and known forms 
of force, can be united in a practical machine by which men shall fly long 
distances through the air, seems to the writer as complete as it is possible 
for the demonstration of any physical fact to be.”°® Soon after airplanes 
began to fly, another renowned astronomer, William H. Pickering, explained 
to the public why commercial travel would never get off the ground: “The 
popular mind often pictures gigantic flying machines speeding across the 
Atlantic and carrying innumerable passengers in a way analogous to our 
modern steamships. .. . [I]t is clear that with our present devices there is no 
hope of competing for racing speed with either our locomotives or our 
automobiles.” '° We have previously recalled another wildly inaccurate 
prophecy about the potential of a new technology—the forecast from the 
beginning of the twentieth century by the makers of Mercedes that there 
would never be more than a million automobiles worldwide. Again, they 
knew more about automobiles than almost anyone but they could not have 
been more wrong in estimating the impact of autos on society. 

Given this tradition of clueless misunderstandings, it is hardly surprising 
that many observers are slow to grasp the most important implications of 
the new information technology—the fact that it transcends the tyranny of 
place. The new technology creates for the first time an infinite, nonterrestrial 
realm for economic activity. It opens an option to explore the new frontiers 
of the cybereconomy, to “think globally and act globally.” This chapter 
explains why. 


BEYOND LOCALITY 


The processing and use of information is rapidly replacing and modifying 
physical products as the most important source of profit. This has major 


202 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


consequences. Information technology divorces income-earning potential 
from residence in any specific geographic location. Since a greater and 
greater portion of the value of products and services will be created by 
adding ideas and knowledge to the product, an ever-smaller component of 
value-added will be subject to capture within local jurisdictions. Ideas can 
be formulated anywhere and transmitted globally at the speed of light. This 
inevitably means that the information economy will be dramatically different 
from the economy of the Factory Age. 

We would concede to the critics that a recital of the tasks you could have 
undertaken through the Internet in 1998 might seem mundane. There is, 
after all, nothing terribly revolutionary about reading an article about gar- 
dening on the Net, or buying a case of wine long-distance. However, the 
potential of the cybereconomy cannot be judged solely on its early begin- 
nings, any more than the potential of the automobile to transform society 
could have been judged by what you could have seen around you in 1900. 
We expect the cybereconomy to evolve through several stages. 

1. The most primitive manifestations of the Information Age involve the 
Net simply as an information medium to facilitate what are otherwise ordi- 
nary industrial-era transactions. At this point, the Net is no more than an 
exotic delivery system for catalogues. Virtual Vineyards, for example, one 
of the first cybermerchants, simply sells wine from a page on the World 
Wide Web. Such transactions are not yet directly subversive of the old 
institutions. They employ industrial currency, and take place within identifi- 
able jurisdictions. These uses of the Internet have little such megapolitical 
impact. 

2. An intermediate stage of Internet commerce will employ information 
technology in ways that would have been impossible in the industrial era, 
such as in long-distance accounting or medical diagnosis. More examples of 
these new applications of advanced computational power are spelled out 
below. The second stage of Net commerce will still function within the old 
institutional framework, employing national currencies and submitting to the 
jurisdiction of nation-states. The merchants who employ the Net for sales 
will not yet employ it to bank their profits, only to earn revenues. These 
profits made on Internet transactions will still be subject to taxation. 

3. A more advanced stage will mark the transition to true cybercom- 
merce. Not only will transactions occur over the Net, but they will migrate 
outside the jurisdiction of nation-states. Payment will be rendered in cyber- 
currency. Profits will be booked in cyberbanks. Investments will be made in 
cyberbrokerages. Many transactions will not be subject to taxation. At this 
stage, cybercommerce will begin to have significant megapolitical conse- 
quences of the kind we have already outlined. The powers of governments 
over traditional areas of the economy will be transformed by the new logic 


Transcending Locality 203 


of the Net. Extraterritorial regulatory power will collapse. Jurisdictions will 
devolve. The structure of firms will change, and so will the nature of work 
and employment. 

This outline of the stages of the Information Revolution is only the barest 
sketch of what could be the most far-reaching economic transformation ever. 


THE GLOBALIZATION OF COMMERCE 


In the Information Age, most current jurisdictional advantages will be 
eroded rapidly by technology. New types of advantages will emerge. Falling 
communications costs have already reduced the need for proximity as a 
necessary condition of doing business. In 1946, it was technically possible 
for an investor in London to place an order with a broker in New York. But 
only the largest and most compelling transaction would have justified doing 
so: a three-minute phone call between New York and London cost $650. 
Today, it costs $0.91. The price of an intercontinental phone call has plunged 
by more than 99 percent in half a century. 


Convergent Communication 


Soon, the difference between intercontinental chat and a local call may be 
minimal. So, too, may be the differences among your telephone, your com- 
puter, and your television. All will be interactive communications devices, 
more easily distinguished on ergonomic than functional grounds. You will 
be able to hold a voice conversation over the Internet using microphones and 
speakers on your personal computer. Or watch a movie. You will be able to 
talk back to your television, and communicate vast amounts of data through 
the network provided by the television entertainment media. As the industrial- 
era distinction between various forms of communication breaks down and 
costs plunge, more and more services will bill you by time of use rather 
than according to the destination of your messages. Conversation or data 
transmission anywhere in the world will cost little more than a local call did 
in most jurisdictions in 1985. 


Internet Unwired 


Low-orbit satellites and other approaches to wireless technology will trans- 
mit feeds back and forth directly to a beeper in your pocket, a portable 
computer, or a workstation, without interfacing with a local telephone op- 
erating or TV cable system at all. In short, the Internet will be unwired. The 
first steps in that direction are bound to be halting because of the relatively 


204 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


slow speed of data transmission in the early wireless media and the difficul- 
ties of “hearing” weak signals broadcast from subscriber devices, some of 
which will be mobile and battery-powered. Nonetheless, these technical 
problems will be tackled and solved as bandwidth increases. 


Business Without Borders 


Continued expansion of computational power will lead to better compression 
technology, speeding data flow. Widespread adoption of existing public key/ 
private key encryption algorithms will allow providers, such as satellite 
systems, to incorporate the billing function into the service, lowering costs. 
Simultaneous with the service, vendors will be able to debit accounts loaded 
on personal computers in much the way that France Telecom debits the 
“smart cards” employed in Paris phone boxes. 


Your Phone Becomes a Bank 


The difference is that in the near future, you will be able to earn credits to 
your account with all manner of transactions and carry your phone box with 
you. Your PC will be the branch office of your bank and global money 
brokerage, as well as the equivalent of the Paris kiosk where you buy your 
anonymous phone card. And like the smart-card pay phones that are useless 
to thieves if broken open with a crowbar, your computer could only be raided 
by someone capable of breaking or manipulating sophisticated computer 
code. That would leave out a lot of ruffians capable of manipulating a 
crowbar. With proper encryption, nothing in your computer could be deci- 
phered or misused. 

By the turn of the millennium, you will be able to transact business almost 
anywhere north of Antarctica. Anywhere wired or digital cellular telephone 
is available. Anywhere interactive cable television systems are in use. Any- 
where a Satellite is overhead or other wireless transmission systems are in 
place. You will be able to speak, transmit data, and journey via virtual reality 
over borders and boundaries at will. Telephone numbers that identify the 
locale of the speaker by area codes are likely to be superseded by universal 
access numbers, which will reach the party with whom you wish to commu- 
nicate anywhere on the planet. Witness Iridium. 


Understanding Chinese 


You will not only be able to talk and send a fax. In time, you will be able to 
shorten a multiyear learning process and converse in Chinese with a factory 
foreman in Shanghai. It will no longer matter as much that you do not speak 


Transcending Locality 205 


his language or dialect. His words may be in Chinese but you will hear them 
roughly translated into English. He will hear your conversation in Chinese. 
In time, the capacity to employ instantaneous translation will significantly 
increase competition in regions where obstacles of language and idiom have 
heretofore been significant. When that happens, it will matter little or not at 
all that the Chinese government may not wish the call to be placed. 


Customized Media 


As the world grows closer together, you will have a greater opportunity than 
at any time in history to customize your particular place in it. Even the 
information you receive on a regular basis from the media will be informa- 
tion of your choosing. The mass media will become the individualized 
media. If you are interested in chess above all else, or are a keen cat 
fancier, you will be able to program your evening news broadcast to feature 
information important to you about cats or chess. No longer will you be at 
the mercy of Dan Rather or the BBC for the news that reaches you. You will 
be able to select news compiled and edited according to your instructions. 


From Mass to Customized Production 


If the news is slow, you can access a virtual catalogue on the World Wide 
Web. If you see a pair of trousers that you almost like, you can adjust the 
width of the cuff when you place your order. It will be custom-cut and 
tailored to fit your body by robots in Malaysia from photographs scanned 
into your computer and transmitted through the Net. 


Cyberbroking 


You will be able to use cybermoney to make investments as well as pay for 
services and products. If you live in a jurisdiction like the United States that 
heavily regulates your investment options, you can choose to domicile your 
activities in a jurisdiction that permits the freedom to pursue a full range of 
investment options. Whether you live in Cleveland or Belo Horizonte, you 
can do your investment business in Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Rio de 
Janeiro, or Buenos Aires. Wherever you find yourself, the use of digital 
resources will widen as the cybereconomy evolves. You will be able to 
employ expert systems to help select your investments, and cyberaccountants 
and -bookkeepers to monitor the progress of your holdings on a real-time 
basis. 


206 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Virtual Culture 


When you are not reviewing profit-and-loss data, you may take a virtual visit 
to the Louvre. Your trip may require you to pay a royalty payment equivalent 
to one-third of a penny to Bill Gates, or someone of equal foresight who 
has purchased the virtual-reality nghts to tour the museum. While you are 
wondering whether the Mona Lisa had trouble with her teeth, your computer 
could be downloading S. I. Hsitung’s translation of The Romance of the 
Western Chamber. At times of your choosing, your personal communications 
system will read the text aloud like a bard of old. Multitasking programs 
will allow you to perform many functions simultaneously. 


Shopping for Jurisdictions on the Net 


If you are inspired by your dose of the classics, you can organize a virtual 
corporation to market dramatic productions of famous literature for viewing 
through three-dimensional retinal display. Instead of being projected into the 
air, the images will be projected directly onto the retinas of viewers with 
low-energy lasers fluctuating fifty thousand times a second. This technology, 
already under development by MicroVision of Seattle, Washington, will 
allow many persons who are legally blind to see. Before undertaking the 
project, you could instruct your digital assistant to canvass the current con- 
tract offers of protection for manufacturing facilities in Malaysia, China, 
Peru, Brazil, and the Czech Republic. When you pick a location, you will 
be able to have your company incorporated in one hour in the Bahamas, 
courtesy of the St. George’s Trust Company. Your instructions will place all 
the company’s liquid assets in a cyberaccount in a cyberbank that is domi- 
ciled simultaneously in Newfoundland, the Cayman Islands, Uruguay, Ar- 
gentina, and Liechtenstein. If any of the jurisdictions attempt to withdraw 
operating authority or seize the assets of depositors, the assets will automati- 
cally be transferred to another jurisdiction at the speed of light. 


QUALITATIVE ADVANCES 


Many of the transactions you soon will be able to perform in cyberspace 
would have been impossible in the Industrial Age, and not simply because 
they cross a language barrier. Sending your digital assistants to locate un- 
translated articles published in Hungarian scientific journals is qualitatively 
different from talking to a librarian. Sitting in on an Oxford tutorial from a 
distance of five thousand miles is not the same as taking the tutorial when 
you are sleeping within six miles of Carfax. And playing the roulette wheel 


Transcending Locality 207 


at the Hotel de Paris, Monte Carlo, is a novel experience when you can do it 
via virtual reality from a party at Punte del Este, Uruguay. 


A Cybervisit to the Cyberdoctor 


In short order, faster than many experts now think possible, activities will 
migrate into the cybereconomy that combine technologies in novel ways to 
transcend the tyranny of place and the antiquated institutions of the industrial 
economy. One day soon, if you have a stomachache, you will be able to 
consult a digital doctor, an expert system with an encyclopedic knowledge 
of symptoms, maladies, and antidotes. It will access your medical history in 
encrypted form, ask whether your pain happens after eating or before meals. 
Whether it is sharp or dull, persistent or episodic. Whatever questions doc- 
tors ask, the digital doctor will ask. It may determine that you drink too 
much wine, or not enough. You may be referred to a cyberspecialist. If you 
need an operation, a cybersurgeon in Bermuda may perform the operation 
long-distance with the aid of specialized equipment that performs micro- 
incisions. 


Life-and-Death Information Processing 


This may sound like science fiction. But many of the components of cyber- 
surgery are already in place. Others will be functional by the time you 
read this book. General Electric has introduced a new magnetic resonance 
treatment machine (MRT) into fifteen hospitals around the world. The ma- 
chine is expected to have a three-year research-and-development phase, but 
after that it is likely to spread rapidly and become a norm for many types of 
surgery. It is one example, but a good one, of the way in which technology 
is changing society. 

Most of us are familiar with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ma- 
chines, in which magnetic resonance techniques are used to provide doctors 
with soft-tissue images for diagnostic purposes. They provide better images 
of soft tissues than X-rays or ultrasound, and have become an essential part 
of modern diagnostic techniques, particularly in cancers. They have, how- 
ever, two significant limitations at present. The tube does not allow free 
access to the patient; the machines are of limited power. 


Cybersurgery 


General Electric has redesigned magnetic resonance machines so that they 
can be used for treatment as well as diagnosis. The power has been upped 
five times. The tube has, in effect, been cut.in two, so the patient will lie 


208 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


between two doughnut-shaped units, rather than being fully enclosed. In- 
stead of taking an image and then performing surgery in the light of that 
image, the surgeon will be able to see what he is doing as he does it. 
MRT will be combined with noninvasive, or less invasive, surgery using 
microtechniques. Instead of having to make large incisions with scalpels, 
the surgeon will make micro incisions with probes, and will be able to see 
what the probes reveal as he operates. He will perform the surgery from the 
image rather than by looking directly into the body. In principle, the probes 
will be operable from a distance. They will be able to destroy tumors with 
laser or cryogenic—heating or freezing—devices of great precision. 

This will permit operations that are now impossible, particularly in neuro- 
surgery, where tumors often lie very close to essential parts of the brain. It 
will also permit repeated operations, when the trauma of the traditional 
surgical operation cannot be repeated without unacceptable damage. 

Some researchers believe that the knife for soft-tissue surgery may be 
looked back on as an obsolete relic by 2010. A lot of fear, and much of the 
aftershock, will be taken out of surgery if that is true. Obviously, this is very 
good news for the patient. Operations which now take hours to perform, and 
have to be followed by days or weeks in the hospital, will take only half an 
hour, and may not require hospitalization at all. Indeed, the surgeon and the 
patient may never even be in the same room. But what will this do to 
hospitals and surgeons? 


Fewer Microsurgeons Doing More 


There will be a revolution in surgery. In training, a third of young surgeons 
have failed to acquire the skills needed for microsurgery. A third are just 
able to do it, and a third become excellent. Similar proportions are found in 
conversion courses for senior surgeons. Fewer surgeons will be able to carry 
out more operations in a shorter time. It is likely that health care insurers 
and individuals seeking surgery will insist on outcome statistics for each 
surgeon, which will vary rather widely. Patients will want to go to surgeons 
who produce the best results, particularly if their conditions are life- 
threatening. In some cases, the best surgeons may operate long-distance. 
They may perform the whole operation from another jurisdiction where 
taxes are lower and courts do not honor exorbitant malpractice claims. 


Digital Lawyers 


Before agreeing to perform an operation, the skilled surgeon will probably 
call upon a digital lawyer to draft an instant contract that specifies and limits 
liability based upon the size and characteristics of the tumor revealed in 
images displayed by the magnetic resonance machine. Digital lawyers will 


Transcending Locality 209 


be information-retrieval systems that automate selection of contract pro- 
visions, employing artificial intelligence processes such as neural networks 
to customize private contracts to meet transnational legal conditions. Partici- 
pants in most high-value or important transactions will not only shop for 
suitable partners with whom to conduct a business; they will also shop for a 
suitable domicile for their transactions. 


Emergency Consultation 


To continue the example of cybersurgery, the technology of the Information 
Age will place a premium on the highest skills in surgery, as it will in almost 
every endeavor. Patients have been willing to pay such a premium for as 
long as there have been knives. But limits on information and the difficulty 
of shopping for surgeons in an emergency in any given locale made the 
market for surgery a very imperfect one. It will be less imperfect in the 
Information Age. A patient facing the need for an operation in twenty-four 
hours, or perhaps even forty-five minutes, could deputize digital assistants 
to locate the top ten surgeons worldwide available to perform such a task 
remotely, review their success rates in similar cases, and solicit offers for 
their particular case from corresponding digital servants. All of this could 
be canvassed in a matter of moments. As a consequence, the most-favored 
10 percent of surgeons will have a far larger share in the global market for 
surgery. The MRT machine, plus microsurgery techniques, will raise the 
premium for their work. Surgeons with less skill will focus on residual local 
markets. 

This life-and-death example helps suggest some of the revolutionary con- 
sequences of the liberation of economies from the tyranny of place. Some- 
one may object that General Electric’s MRT machine was not meant to be 
employed long-distance. Perhaps, but this misses the point. It or some equip- 
ment like it soon will be. When operations are better performed by surgeons 
watching a screen than looking at the patient directly, it will matter less than 
we now suppose where the surgeon and his screen are located. Increasing 
numbers of services are destined to be reconfigured to reflect the fact that 
information technology allows persons anywhere on the globe to interact in 
even so delicate a matter as surgery. 

In activities that require less precise equipment, and involve lower risks 
of failure, the cybereconomy will flourish even more rapidly. 


“The financial policy of the welfare state requires that there be no way for the 
owners of wealth to protect themselves.” 


— ALAN GREENSPAN 


210 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


THE DEVALUATION OF COMPULSION 


In almost every competitive area, including most of the world’s multitrillion- 
dollar investment activity, the migration of transactions into cyberspace will 
be driven by an almost hydraulic pressure—the impetus to avoid predatory 
taxation, including the tax that inflation places upon everyone who holds his 
wealth in a national currency. 


Escaping the Protection Racket 


You do not need to think long about the megapolitics of the Information Age 
to realize that predatory taxes and inflation of the kind imposed as a matter 
of right by the wealthiest industrial countries upon their citizens will be 
preposterously uncompetitive on the new frontier of cyberspace. Soon after 
the turn of the millennium, anyone who pays income taxes at rates currently 
imposed will be doing so out of choice. As Frederic C. Lane pointed out, 
history shows that on “the frontiers and on the high seas, where no one had 
an enduring monopoly in the use of violence, merchants avoided payment 
of exactions which were so high that protection could be obtained more 
cheaply by other means.” !! 

The cybereconomy provides just such an alternative. No government will 
be able to monopolize it. And the information technologies comprised by it 
will provide cheaper and more effective protection for financial assets than 
most governments ever had reason to provide. 


The Black Magic of Compound Interest 


2 
ak 


Remember, each $5,000 of annual tax payments paid over forty years slashes 
your net worth by $2.2 million, assuming you could realize just a 10 percent 
return on your capital. At a 20 percent return, the compound loss balloons 
to about $44 million. For high-income earners in a high-tax country, the 
cumulative losses from predatory taxation over a lifetime are staggering. 
Most will lose more than they ever had. 

This sounds impossible, but the mathematics are clear. It is something 
that you can confirm for yourself with a pocket calculator. The top 1 percent 
of taxpayers in the United States pay an average of more than $125,000 in 
federal income taxes annually. For a fraction of that amount, $45,000 a year, 
one would be welcome to live under a private tax treaty in Switzerland, and 
enjoy law and order provided by what is arguably the most honest police and 
judicial system in the world. From this perspective, the additional $80,000 a 
year of income tax paid above that generous level might well be classified 


Transcending Locality 211 


as tribute or plunder. Forty-five thousand dollars is certainly a substantial 
payment toward the maintenance of law and order, considering that police 
protection is meant to be a public good. In theory, public goods can be 
extended to additional users at a marginal cost of zero. The Swiss are glad 
to have you pay a negotiated fixed tax of $45,000 (50,000 Swiss francs) per 
year because they make an annual profit of $45,000 on every millionaire 
who signs up. 

Compared to the Swiss alternative, the lifetime losses from paying federal 
income tax at U.S. rates would be $705 million for an investor who could 
average a 20 percent rate of return. But remember, that assumes an annual 
tax payment of $45,000. Compared to a tax haven like Bermuda, where the 
income tax is zero, the lifetime loss for paying taxes at American rates 
would be about $1.1 billion. 

You may object that an annual return of 20 percent is a high rate of return. 
No doubt you would be right. But given the startling growth in Asia in 
recent decades, many investors in the world have achieved that and better. 
The compound rate of return in Hong Kong real estate since 1950 has been 
more than 20 percent per annum. Even some economies that are less widely 
known for growth have afforded easy opportunities for high profits. You 
could have pocketed an average real return of more than 30 percent annually 
in U.S. dollar deposits in Paraguayan banks over the last three decades. High 
investment returns are easier to realize in some places than others, but skilled 
investors can certainly achieve profits of 20 percent or more in good years, 
even if they do not consistently match the performances of George Soros or 
Warren Buffet. 

Obviously, the higher the rate of return that you could earn on your 
capital, the greater the opportunity costs that predatory income and capital 
gains taxes impose. But the conclusion that the loss is huge, indeed greater 
than the total amount of wealth that you may ever accumulate, does not 
depend upon your being able to achieve outlandish rates of return. Some 
mutual funds operating in the United States have averaged annual gains of 
more than 10 percent for more than half a century. If you could do no better 
than that and you are among the top | percent of American earners, then 
your net worth is reduced by more than $33 million just by the income tax 
you pay in excess of $45,000 annually. Compared to a jurisdiction without 
income tax, the loss is $55 million. 


$55 Rather Than $55 Million 


If the profit-maximizing assumptions of economists are correct, as we be- 
lieve they generally are, one of the more certain predictions you could make 
is that most people would act to salvage $55 million if they could. That is 


212 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


our prediction. When the black magic of compound interest becomes more 
clear in the minds of successful people in high-tax countries, they will begin 
to shop in earnest among jurisdictions, just as they now shop for automobiles 
or compare rates on insurance policies. If you doubt it, merely stop people 
at random on the streets of New York or Toronto and ask whether they would 
move to Bermuda for $55 million. The question answers itself. The quandary 
it poses is reminiscent of that Mark Twain imagined in deciding whether he 
would prefer to spend the night with Lillian Russell stark naked or General 
Grant in full dress uniform. He did not deliberate long. Residents of mature 
welfare states, particularly the United States, may be slower on the uptake, 
but only because they are not yet aware of the choice they face. In the 
fullness of time, they will be. You or anyone motivated by the desire to live 
a better life will see the attraction of reducing the losses you suffer from 
predatory taxation. You need merely lodge your transactions in cyberspace. 
This will, of course, be illegal in many jurisdictions. But old laws seldom 
can resist new technology. In the 1980s, it was illegal in the United States to 
send a fax message. The U.S. Post Office considered faxes to be first-class 
mail, over which the U.S. Post Office claimed an ancient monopoly. An edict 
to that effect was issued reiterating the requirement that all fax transmissions 
be routed to the nearest post office for delivery with regular mail. Billions 
of fax messages later, it is unclear whether anyone ever complied with that 
law. If so, compliance was fleeting. The advantages of operating in the 
emerging cybereconomy are even more compelling than sidestepping the 
post office in sending a fax. 

Widespread adoption of public-key/private-key encryption technologies 
will soon allow many economic activities to be completed anywhere you 
please. As James Bennet, technology editor of Strategic Investment, has 
written: I 

Enforcement of laws and particularly tax codes has become heavily dependent 
on surveillance of communications and transactions. Once the next logical 
steps have been taken, and offshore banking locations offer the services of 
communication in hard RSA-encrypted electronic mail using account numbers 
derived from public-key systems, financial transactions will be almost impossi- 
ble to monitor at the bank or in communications. Even if the tax authorities 
were to plant a mole in the offshore bank, or burglarize the bank records, they 
would not be able to identify depositors. !? 


To a degree that has never before been possible, individuals will be able to 
determine where to domicile their economic activities and how much income 
tax they prefer to pay. Many transactions in the Information Age will not 
need to be domiciled in any territorial sovereignty at all. Those that do will 
increasingly find their way to places like Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, 


Transcending Locality 213 


Uruguay, or similar jurisdictions that do not impose income taxes or other 
costly transaction burdens on commerce. 


From Monopoly to Competition 


Governments have become accustomed to imposing “protection services” 
that are, in Frederic C. Lane’s words, “of poor quality and outrageously 
overpriced.” '? This habit of charging far more than government’s services 
are actually worth developed through centuries of monopoly. Taxes were 
ruthlessly raised on anyone who seemed capable of paying—precisely be- 
cause governments had a monopoly or near-monopoly on coercion. This 
tradition of monopoly will clash in a profound way with the new megapoliti- 
cal possibilities of cybercommerce. 

Encryption will make it easy to protect transactions in cyberspace. The 
cost of an effective encryption software program, like PGP, is less than the 
commission charged by a full-service broker on a trade of one hundred 
shares. Yet it will render almost any transaction invisible and impervious to 
governments and thieves for many years to come. The new technology of 
the Information Age will effectively protect cyberassets at a vanishingly 
small cost. For $55 rather than $55 million, participants in the cybereconomy 
will enjoy better actual protection of their assets than they enjoyed during 
the industrial era or at any previous time in history. Easily used encryption 
algorithms and the capacity to shop between terrestrial domiciles for transac- 
tions will provide effective protection against the largest source of predation, 
nation-states themselves. 

That is not to say that territorial governments will be entirely outmaneu- 
vered. They will still be able to exploit vulnerabilities to personal harm in 
order to extract head taxes, or perhaps even hold wealthy individuals to 
outright ransom. They will also be able to enforce collection of consumption 
taxes. Yet protection, the most important service governments provide, will 
be put on a more nearly competitive basis. Less of the cost that productive 
people pay for protection will be available to be seized and reallocated by 
political authorities. Technological innovations will place a large and grow- 
ing portion of the world’s wealth outside the reach of governments. This will 
reduce the risks of trade, sharply lowering, in historian Janet Abu-Lughod’s 
words, “the proportion of all costs” that otherwise would have had to be 
“allocated to transit duties, tribute, or simple extortion.” '4 

It has been rare in history to find governments truly constrained by compe- 
tition. In the few times when something remotely like this has happened, 
governments were weak and technologies were similar between jurisdictions. 
As Lane suggested, the principal factor affecting profitability under such 
conditions tends to be the difference in protection costs paid by different 


214 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


entrepreneurs. The medieval merchant who had to pay twenty tolls to bring 
his goods to market could not compete with a merchant who had to pay only 
four tolls to deliver the same goods to the customer. Similar conditions are 
destined to return with the Information Age. Profitability will once again be 
determined not so much by technological advantage as by your success in 
minimizing the costs you are forced to pay for protection. 

This new economic dynamic directly contradicts the desire of government 
left over from the industrial era to impose monopoly pricing for its protection 
services. But, like it or not, the old system will be nonviable in the new 
competitive environment of the Information Age. Any government that in- 
sists upon lumbering its citizens with heavy taxes that competitors do not 
pay will merely assure that profits and wealth gravitate someplace else. 
Therefore, the failure of the mature welfare states to curtail taxes over the 
long term will be self-correcting. Governments that tax too much will simply 
make residence anywhere within their power a bankrupting liability. 


“.. as the king by his prerogative may make money of what matter and form 
he pleaseth, and establish the standard of it, so may he change his money in 
substance and impression, and enhance or debase the value of it, or entirely 
decry and annul it... .”° 


—FROM AN ENGLISH COURT DECISION, 1604 


THE DEATH OF SEIGNIORAGE 


Governments will not only lose their power to tax many forms of income 
and capital; they are also destined to lose their power of compulsion over 
money. In the past, megapolitical transitions have been associated with 
changes in the character of money. 


The introduction of coinage helped launch the five-hundred-year cycle of 

expansion in the ancient economy that culminated with the birth of Christ 

and the lowest interest rates before the modern period. 

¢ The advent of the Dark Ages coincided with virtual closure of the mints. 
While Roman coinage continued to circulate, quantities of money dwin- 
dled along with trade in a self-reinforcing downward spiral. 

¢ The feudal revolution coincided with a reintroduction of money, coinage, 

bills of exchange, and other devices for settling commercial transactions. 

In particular, a surge in European silver production from new mines at 

Rammelsberg, Germany, facilitated an increase in the circulation of coin 

that helped lubricate commerce. 


Transcending Locality 215 


¢ The greatest revolution in money prior to the Information Age came with 
the advent of industrialism. The early-modern state consolidated its power 
in the Gunpowder Revolution. As its control increased, the state asserted 
its power over money, and came to rely heavily upon the signature technol- 
ogy of industrialism, the printing press. The first implement of mass pro- 
duction, the printing press, has been widely used by governments in the 
modern period to mass-produce paper money. 


Paper money is a distinctly industrial product. It would have been imprac- 
tical before the printing press to duplicate receipts or certificates that became 
paper currency. Certainly, monks in the scriptoria would not have spent 
their time well drawing fifty-pound notes. Paper money also contributed 
significantly to the power of the state, not only by generating profits from 
depreciating the currency, but by giving the state leverage over who could 
accumulate wealth. As Abu-Lughod put it, “when paper money backed by 
the state become the approved currency, the chances for amassing capital in 
opposition to or independent of the state machinery became difficult.” '° 


CYBERCASH 


Now the advent of the Information Age implies another revolution in the 
character of money. As cybercommerce begins, it will lead inevitably to 
cybermoney. This new form of money will reset the odds, reducing the 
capacity of the world’s nation-states to determine who becomes a Sovereign 
Individual. A crucial part of this change will come about because of the 
effect of information technology in liberating the holders of wealth from 
expropriation through inflation. Soon, you will pay for almost any transac- 
tion over the Net or World Wide Web at the same time you place it, using 
cybercash. 

This new digital form of money is destined to play a pivotal role in 
cybercommerce. It will consist of encrypted sequences of multihundred-digit 
prime numbers. Unique, anonymous, and verifiable, this money will accom- 
modate the largest transactions. It will also be divisible into the tiniest 
fraction of value. It will be tradable at a keystroke in a multitrillion-dollar 
wholesale market without borders. 


Dialing Without Dollars 


Inevitably, this new cybermoney will be denationalized. When Sovereign 
Individuals can deal across borders in a realm with no physical reality, they 
will no longer need to tolerate the long-rehearsed practice of governments 
degrading the value of their money through inflation. Why should they? 


216 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


Control over money will migrate from the halls of power to the global 
marketplace. Any individual or firm with access to cyberspace will be able 
to easily shift out of any currency that appears in danger of depreciation. 
Unlike today, there will be no necessity to deal in legal tender. Indeed, in 
transactions spanning the globe it will be likely that at least one party to 
every transaction will find himself dealing in a currency that is not legal 
tender to him. 


Disadvantages of Barter Reduced 


You will be able to trade in any medium you wish in the cybereconomy. As 
the late Nobel Prize—winning economist F. A. Hayek argued, there is “no 
clear distinction between money and non-money.” He wrote, “ although we 
usually assume there is a sharp line of distinction between what is money 
and what is not—and the law generally tries to make such a distinction—so 
far as the causal effects of monetary events are concerned, there is no such 
clear difference. What we find is rather a continuum in which objects of 
various degrees of liquidity, or with values which can fluctuate indepen- 
dently of each other, shade into each other in the degree to which they 
function as money.”'”? Digital money on global computer networks will 
make every object on Hayek’s continuum of liquidity more liquid—except 
government paper. One consequence will be that barter will become far 
more practical. Increasing numbers of objects and services will be offered 
in specific bids for other objects and services. These potential transactions 
will be widely advertised throughout the world on the Net, which will 
increase their liquidity by magnitudes. 

One of the principal drawbacks of barter has always been the difficulty of 
matching a person with one specific demand with another who had exactly 
that on offer and was seeking to acquire for himself exactly what the first 
proposed to trade. Primitive barter stumbled over the daunting improbability 
of exactly matching two parties wishing to exchange in a local market. Cash 
transcended the limitations of barter, and its advantages will continue to be 
compelling in most transactions. But vast increases in computational power 
and the globalization of commerce in cyberspace also reduce the drawbacks 
of barter. The odds of finding someone with exactly reciprocal desires to 
yours increase dramatically when you can sort instantly across the entire 
world rather than drawing on only those whom you might meet locally. 


Not Subject to Counterfeiting 


While paper money will no doubt remain in circulation as a residual medium 
of exchange for the poor and computer-illiterate, money for high-value 


Transcending Locality 217 


transactions will be privatized. Cybermoney will no longer be denominated 
only in national units like the paper money of the industrial period. It 
probably will be defined in terms of grams or ounces of gold, as finely 
divisible as gold itself. Or it may be defined in terms of other real stores of 
value. Even where different pricing measures are used, or certain transac- 
tions continue to be denominated in national currencies, cybermoney will 
serve the consumers far better than nationalized money ever did. Rapidly 
advancing computational capacity will diminish the difficulties of adjusting 
prices to various media of exchange to the vanishing point. Each transaction 
will involve the transfer of encrypted multihundred-digit prime-number se- 
quences. Unlike the paper-money receipts issued by governments during the 
gold-standard era, which could be duplicated at will, the new digital gold 
standard or its barter equivalents will be almost impossible to counterfeit for 
the fundamental mathematical reason that it is all but impossible to unravel 
the product of multihundred-digit prime numbers. All receipts will be veri- 
fiably unique. 

The names of traditional currencies like the “pound” and the “peso” 
reflect the fact that they originated as measures of weight of specific quanti- 
ties of precious metals. The pound sterling was once upon a time a pound of 
sterling silver. Paper money in the West began as warehouse or safe-deposit 
receipts for quantities of precious metals. Governments issuing these receipts 
soon found that they could print far more of them than they could actually 
redeem from their supply of bullion. This was easy. No individual holding a 
gold or silver certificate could distinguish any information about the actual 
supply of precious metals from his receipt. Other than the serial numbers, 
all the receipts looked alike, a fact that appealed to counterfeiters as well as 
politicians and bankers seeking to profit from inflating the supply of money. 

Cybermoney will be all but impossible to counterfeit in this way, officially 
or unofficially. The verifiability of the digital receipts rules out this classic 
expedient for expropriating wealth through inflation. The new digital money 
of the Information Age will return control over the medium of exchange to 
the owners of wealth, who wish to preserve it, rather than to nation-states 
that wish to spirit it away. 


The Transaction Cost of “Free” Currency 


Use of this new cybermoney will substantially free you from the power of 
the state. Earlier, we cited the dreary record of the world’s nation-states in 
maintaining the value of their currencies over the past half century. No 
currency has suffered a smaller loss from inflation since World War II than 
the German mark. Yet even so, 71 percent of its value vanished between 
January 1, 1949, and the end of June 1995. The world reserve currency 


218 THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL 


during this period, the U.S. dollar, lost 84 percent of its value.'* This is a 
measure of the wealth that governments expropriated by exploiting their 
territorial monopolies on legal tender. 

Note that there is no intrinsic necessity that currency depreciate or that 
the nominal cost of living rise every year. To the contrary. The technical 
challenge of maintaining the purchasing power of savings is trivial. You can 
see this merely by looking at the long-term purchasing power of gold. 
Between January 1, 1949, and the end of June 1995, while the best of 
nationalized currencies lost almost three-quarters of its value, the purchasing 
power of gold actually rose. As documented by Professor Roy W. Jastrom in 
his book The Golden Constant, gold has maintained its purchasing power, 
with minor fluctuations, for as far back as reliable price records are available, 
to 1560 in the case of England. 

National currencies linked to gold have also maintained their purchasing 
power when military exigencies were not pressing. The value of the British 
pound sterling rose, rather than fell, during the relatively peaceful nineteenth 
century even though it was only weakly linked to gold. The new mega- 
political conditions of the Information Age make feasible not a weak link, 
like the gold standard, but a strong link, reinforced for the first time by 
vastly improved information and computational resources in the hands of 
consumers. 


The threat of the speedy loss of their whole business if they failed to meet 
expectations (and how any government organization would be certain to abuse 
the opportunity to play with raw material prices!) would provide a much 
stronger safeguard than any that could be devised against a government mo- 
nopoly.'9 : 


—FRIEDRICH A. VON HAYEK 


Privatizing Money 


Friedrich von Hayek argued in 1976 that the use of competitive, private 
currencies would eradicate inflation.2° Without legal-tender requirements 
forcing acceptance of an inflating currency within a jurisdiction, Hayek 
argued, market competition would force th